Title: Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26922v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 00:16:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles 

# Ruoxi Shang 

rxshang@uw.edu University of Washington Seattle, Washington, USA 

# Dan Marshall 

Dan.Marshall@microsoft.com Microsoft Research Redmond, Washington, USA 

# Edward Cutrell 

cutrell@microsoft.com Microsoft Research Redmond, Washington, USA 

# Denae Ford 

denae@microsoft.com Microsoft Research Redmond, Washington, USA 

## Abstract 

AI agents that communicate on behalf of individuals need to capture how each person actually communicates, yet current approaches either require costly per-person fine-tuning, produce generic out-puts from shallow persona descriptions, or optimize preferences without modeling communication style. We present ASPECT (Au-tomated Social Psychometric Evaluation of Communication Traits), a pipeline that directs LLMs to assess constructs from a validated communication scale against behavioral evidence from workplace data, without per-person training. In a case study with 20 partici-pants (1,840 paired item ratings, 600 scenario evaluations), ASPECT-generated profiles achieved moderate alignment with self-assessments, and ASPECT-generated responses were preferred over generic and self-report baselines on aggregate, with substantial variation across individuals and scenarios. During the profile review phase, linked evidence helped participants identify mischaracterizations, recal-ibrate their own self-ratings, and negotiate context-appropriate representations. We discuss implications for building inspectable, individually scoped communication profiles that let individuals control how agents represent them at work. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → Collaborative and social computing systems and tools ; Empirical studies in collabora-tive and social computing ; User studies .

## Keywords 

communication style, psychometric profiling, LLM personalization, AI agents, mimetic alignment, user auditing 

## 1 Introduction 

AI agents are increasingly expected to communicate not just for peo-ple but as them: auto-replying to messages, attending meetings on a user’s behalf, or acting as conversational proxies when someone is unavailable [ 9, 34 , 43 ]. For these agents to be useful, they must cap-ture how a specific individual communicates, not produce a generic approximation [ 24 , 33 ]. Unlike public figures with documented per-sonas that models can learn from [ 1], ordinary individuals have private, sparse, and context-dependent communication patterns. A person may be direct with peers and diplomatic with leadership, verbose in brainstorming and terse in status updates. Representing someone faithfully means capturing these patterns from their actual behavior. To date, existing approaches to personalization fall short. Persona prompting, where the model is given a short description of who to imitate, produces outputs that look superficially different but are similar across individuals [ 8, 52 ]. Per-person fine-tuning or preference-based alignment (RLHF, DPO) can capture individual patterns but requires substantial data and compute for each person, does not scale, and produces opaque models that the individual cannot inspect or adjust. We introduce ASPECT (Automated Social Psychometric Evaluation of Communication Traits) , a pipeline that uses LLMs guided by a validated psychometric scale to extract repre-sentative snippets from a person’s social interaction data and build a structured, evidence-grounded communication profile without per-person training. As each dimension score is linked to specific quotes and rationales, the profile is interpretable—the person can inspect where it is aligned or not. Whether such a profile is socially appropriate, however, can only be determined by the person it rep-resents [ 9 , 21 , 25 ]. We therefore conducted a case study with 20 participants from a single organization to assess what the pipeline captures and where it falls short (Section 3.3). Each participant first reviewed their inferred profile against their own self-ratings, inspecting the behavioral evidence and rationales behind each con-struct. They then evaluated scenario-based responses generated under three conditions: Profiled (from ASPECT-inferred profile), 

Self-Report (based upon self-ratings only), and Generic (vanilla GPT with no personalization). Our evaluation reveals three key patterns: profiled responses were preferred over both baselines on aggregate, though with sub-stantial individual and scenario variation; LLMs exhibited a consis-tent positivity bias, over-rating socially desirable traits; and profile review prompted participants to recalibrate their own self-ratings and negotiate context-appropriate representations. This paper con-tributes: (1) ASPECT , a profiling pipeline that operationalizes a val-idated psychometric instrument as a prompt-based data compression method, generating structured communica-tion profiles that are portable across models and inspectable by the people they describe. 

> 1
> arXiv:2603.26922v1 [cs.HC] 27 Mar 2026 Shang, et al.

(2) Empirical evidence from 20 participants providing the first systematic account of LLM-based communication pro-filing evaluated by the individuals being modeled, reveal-ing that inference preserves relative profile shape but in-troduces predictable biases—findings that directly inform calibration strategies for future systems. (3) Design implications for human-in-the-loop profile nego-tiation: we demonstrate that evidence-linked review shifts profiling from a classification task to a collaborative nego-tiation, where individuals decide not just whether a profile is accurate but which version of themselves they want an agent to represent. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 From communication support to AI representation 

AI-mediated communication (AI-MC) systems help users commu-nicate more effectively by modifying, augmenting, or generating messages for interpersonal objectives [ 21 ]. Applications include rewriting for empathy [ 49 ], reframing negative perspectives [ 54 ], smart reply suggestions [ 22 ], persuasion enhancement [ 26 ], con-veying status [ 44 ] or trustworthiness [ 35 ], promoting democratic discourse [ 2], and increasing affectionate communication between partners [ 27 ]. In each case, the user remains the communicator; the AI operates on the message, not on the person’s behalf. A different line of work builds agents that communicate as in-dividuals. Dittos are personalized embodied agents that attend meetings when users are unavailable [ 34 ]. Recent work has ex-perimented with generative agents that simulate human behavior in virtual environments [ 41 ] and mimetic models predict specific individuals’ responses [ 37 ]. Platforms like Character.AI generate representations of public figures and fictional characters [ 1]. Pub-lic figures have documented personas that models can learn from. For ordinary individuals with private footprints, building an accu-rate representation remains an open problem, and these develop-ments raise concerns about identity fragmentation, autonomy, and whether individuals can recognize and approve how AI speaks for them [33]. The dominant paradigm for aligning model behavior to users is preference-based optimization. RLHF [ 40 ] and DPO [ 46 ] train mod-els to produce outputs that humans prefer, and recent personalized variants learn per-user reward functions from heterogeneous feed-back [ 7, 45 ]. These methods address a different problem than ours. Preference alignment optimizes which output a user likes; style representation captures how a specific person communicates. A person might prefer concise AI responses while writing lengthy, dis-cursive emails themselves. Preference-based methods also require hundreds to thousands of comparisons per individual, each encod-ing a binary signal along an unspecified axis, and produce opaque reward functions tied to specific model weights. Representing some-one’s communication style for social contexts requires a structured, interpretable profile that the person can inspect and adjust. Closest works to ours are agent simulations initialized from survey data re-produce behaviors for over 1,000 individuals [ 42 ], and general user models infer structured beliefs from everyday computer use traces [ 48 ]. However, these aforementioned approaches do not typically use observational data and experiment with profiling for social communication contexts as we do in our approach. 

## 2.2 Building structured profiles of individuals 

Design personas compress user segments into qualitative narratives that ground coordination across teams [ 39 ]. Psychometric instru-ments take a complementary approach: they decompose individual behavior into quantitative, theory-backed constructs that can be reliably measured and compared across people [ 13 , 15 ]. The Big Five personality model, for example, captures individual differences across five broad domains and finer-grained facet-level traits using standardized inventories [ 12 , 20 ]. For communication specifically, the Communication Styles Inventory (CSI) models six domains with 23 facets, each operationalized by behaviorally anchored items rated on Likert scales, with validated internal consistency and convergent evidence [ 14 ]. These instruments provide interpretable dimensions with established reliability, making them candidates for structur-ing an individual’s profile. With foundation models, personality prompting has been used to steer LLM behavior toward specific trait configurations. Recent tests show, however, that personality-prompted LLMs often fail to behave consistently with the intended persona in social decision paradigms [ 52 ]. A structured profile does not guarantee appropriate downstream behavior; the person being represented needs to verify it. Behavioral data offers a complementary path to building indi-vidual profiles. Digital-footprint inference translates social media traces into Big Five predictions that rival close acquaintances’ as-sessments [ 30 , 51 ], and data-grounded methods reduce biases inher-ent in self-report [ 29 ]. These systems demonstrate that behavioral traces carry stable personality signals, but they output broad trait scores without linking them to specific behavioral evidence that the person can review. General user models take a different approach, accumulating calibrated, revisable beliefs about specific individu-als from everyday computer use to drive context-aware assistants [ 48 ]. They model what a person does across applications but do not organize that knowledge around validated communication con-structs. At the population scale, agent simulations initialized from qualitative interviews can reproduce survey responses and behav-iors for over 1,000 individuals [ 42 ], showing that it is possible to represent many distinct people rather than a single average user, though their profiles are derived from interview summaries rather than observed interaction data. Domain-specific work has shown the value of adapting communication style for particular contexts, from culturally tailored persuasive agents [ 53 ] to health chatbots adapted for multicultural caregivers [ 3], but these adapt style at the group level rather than building individual profiles. Across this landscape, a gap remains: no existing approach builds structured communication profiles for individuals that are orga-nized by validated psychometric constructs, grounded in behavioral evidence from the person’s own data, and open to the person’s in-spection and adjustment. We explore this direction with ASPECT, which uses a psychometric scale as scaffolding to compress an indi-vidual’s workplace communication data into a structured, evidence-linked profile, and we assess what this approach captures and where it falls short in one workplace setting. 

> 2Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles

## 3 System Design 

ASPECT constructs a structured communication profile for a given individual from their workplace interaction data using a psychome-tric instrument as a novel prompt-based data compression method. 

## 3.1 Conceptual Model 

Language models can simulate individual behaviors and prefer-ences when provided with behavioral data [ 42 , 48 , 52 ]. We build on this capability to construct communication profiles from observed workplace interaction data. While several approaches can steer LLM behavior with personal data, we use prompt-based context engineering for two reasons. First, it is lightweight. Fine-tuning requires substantial data per person, is costly to maintain, and produces opaque models. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) does not fit this task. Re-trieval methods would weigh informational relevancy more, and also lead to unstable and inconsistent characteristics across conver-sations. Second, the approach must be interpretable. As using AI to represent individuals in social communications is still exploratory, there is no consensus on what aspects of communication need to be captured, what works, or why. Computed metrics cannot validate this nuance, and only the individuals themselves can verify whether their profile is socially appropriate. Hence, we need an approach that can render the profile interpretable, allowing people to review each component, identify where it succeeds or fails, and examine probable causes. Given these requirements, we wanted to develop a structured profile prompt with good coverage of communication di-mensions. Our challenge was then to determine which dimensions to include and how to extract them from data. We draw inspiration from psychometric assessment, both as a 

method and as a measurement instrument (Section 2.2). As a method, psychometric assessment follows a structured procedure—trained observers review behavioral evidence through specific constructs and score standardized items—and we apply this same logic to LLMs. Rather than asking the model to characterize a person open-endedly, we direct it to scan communication data construct by construct, collect behavioral evidence for each, and score individual items against the collected evidence. As an instrument, a validated psychometric scale provides the construct scaffolding that organizes this process. A construct such as Talkativeness in the CSI [ 14 ] is operationalized by behaviorally anchored items, each rated on a Likert scale. Such scales report continuous scores across dimensions and facet-level subtraits rather than assigning a categorical “type.” Their validated structure supports internal consistency and stability across contexts. The resulting profile is a set of construct-level ratings, each linked to behavioral evidence. It aggregates across many inter-actions rather than reflecting a single event. We instantiate this approach using the CSI; Section 4.1 details the specific instrument and data. 

## 3.2 Profile Pipeline Development 

The profiling pipeline implements this approach in two phases. We used OpenAI’s o1 reasoning model for all inference tasks. 

Phase 1: Construct-guided Evidence Extraction. The social interac-tion data contains authentic behavior but is vast, sparse, and noisy. The challenge is how to compress it into a structured representa-tion of an individual’s communication patterns. The pipeline first preprocesses the user’s communication data (e.g., meeting tran-scripts, group chats) into batches organized by token budget. It then scans the data facet by facet : for each of the scale’s constructs, the LLM receives one batch of communication files along with the construct definition and its associated scale items. The model is instructed to act as an objective observer and identify 2–5 concrete instances where the user’s behavior demonstrates that specific con-struct. Scanning one facet at a time ensures that the model attends to one behavioral pattern across the full breadth of the data, rather than attempting to characterize the user holistically in a single pass. Each evidence record pairs a context summary covering the situation, social dynamics, setting, and behavioral analysis with a conversational excerpt of 2–5 turns, keeping judgments traceable to source data (Appendix A). 

Phase 2: Inferred Assessment from Item-level Scoring. Once evi-dence has been collected for all constructs, the pipeline scores each individual scale item independently. For a given item (e.g., “I always have a lot to say”), the model receives the item text together with the behavioral evidence extracted for its parent facet in Phase 1. It then produces a numerical rating (1–5) and a brief rationale ground-ing the rating in the observed evidence. Items within the same facet share the same evidence pool, ensuring scoring consistency within constructs. When no behavioral evidence was found for a facet, the pipeline assigns default ratings that reflect absence of the behavior rather than leaving scores undefined. An example item-level output: 

> {"Item": "I sometimes toss bizarre ideas into a group discussion.", "Rating": "4/5", "Rationale": "Across multiple brainstorming sessions, the user repeatedly suggests unconventional ideas (novel workflow automations, experimental feature integrations). These proposals show a pattern of introducing unusual concepts, aligning well with the idea of occasionally tossing unexpected suggestions into group discussions."}

Evidence extraction and scoring address different questions (“what did this person do?” vs. “how well does this item describe them?”), and decoupling them allows each step to be inspected and validated independently. Our evaluation asks whether the profiling pipeline produces pro-files that individuals recognize as capturing their communication style, and whether those profiles generate appropriate AI behav-ior in context. The first does not guarantee the second, because a person might accept their trait scores yet find AI responses gener-ated from them stilted or situationally off. We therefore evaluate at both the profile level and the behavioral level. Since representation 

> 3

Shang, et al. Data Compression of Activity Log 

> Extr act ex amples
> for Conciseness
> Extr act ex amples
> for Ch arm

1 2

> Ex amples th at show
> Conciseness
> Ex amples th at show
> Ch arm
> N constructs
> Item 1: x/5
> Ration ale: xxxxx
> Item 2: x/5
> Ration ale: xxxxx
> Item 3: x/5
> Ration ale: xxxxx

3Inferred Assessment  User Self-Assessment 

# Pro file Pipeline Development  Use 

> Item 1: x/5
> Ration ale: xxxxx
> Item 2: x/5
> Ration ale: xxxxx
> Item 3: x/5
> Ration ale: xxxxx

3 User Self-Assessment  4 User Pro file Review   

> ASPECT vs. SELF

5 User Scen ario Ev alu ation 

# ent  User Pro file Ev alu ation 

Figure 1: Profile Generation Pipeline and User Evaluation Overview. See text for detailed explanation for each phase 

preferences are personal [ 9, 21 , 25 ], participants serve as the pri-mary evaluators at both the profile and behavioral levels. We use participant not as ground-truth accuracy measure of our system, but to provide insight where the pipeline succeeds, fails, and what alignment means if they were to use this in practice. 

Phase 3: User Self-Assessment. To ground the profile review, par-ticipants first complete a self-assessment on the same instrument the pipeline scored (the CSI we mentioned previously), providing per-item comparison data. Both stages are implemented as a Flask web application with standard HTML/JavaScript, served locally to 

4Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles 

Figure 2: Detailed outline of Phase 4: User Profile Review. 

each participant. The application guides participants through self-assessment, profile review with side-by-side score comparisons and linked evidence, and blinded scenario evaluation. Participants can flag factual errors or unrepresentative evidence during review, and all responses and preferences are persisted as JSON for analysis. 

## 3.3 User Profile Evaluation 

Phase 4: User Profile Review. The review interface mirrors the in-strument’s ontological nature (Figure 2 mirrors Table 1). At the top level, participants navigate the CSI’s dimension-facet-item struc-ture (1). Expanding a dimension reveals individual items (2), the statements that both participants and ASPECT rate directly. Dur-ing self-assessment, participants see only raw items without the ontological context, so they are not primed by construct labels. Each item links to behavioral evidence extracted from the user’s data (3): a representative conversational excerpt of 2–5 turns with the model’s rationale. Several interface elements support comparison and verification as highlighted in Figure 2: (A)ASPECT and self-ratings appear side by side, with red highlighting for disagreements of 2 or more points; (B) percent agreement across ratings; (C) an example count per construct shows where data coverage is thin; (D) the system’s full rationale is displayed for each score; and (E) a reverse-coded indicator flags items that measure the opposite direction of their parent construct. Appendix B includes additional details. 

Phase 5: User Scenario-Based Evaluation. Scenario-based evalu-ation tests whether the inferred profile produces appropriate re-sponses in concrete workplace situations. Scenarios must be person-ally relevant so that participants can meaningfully judge whether a response captures how they would communicate, but they must also be structurally comparable across participants so that responses can be analyzed across the sample. Fully personalized scenarios for each participant would make cross-participant comparison impossible; identical generic scenarios would lack ecological validity. We separate scenario structure from scenario content . Struc-ture comes from the APRACE taxonomy (Actor–Partner–Relation– Activities–Context–Evaluation) [ 23 ], which decomposes interper-sonal situations into independent dimensions that map to work-place communication constructs. We authored 10 scenario tem-plates spanning the six CSI dimensions, each defined by a fixed configuration of eleven APRACE factors such as hierarchy, famil-iarity, purpose, and stakes. Templates were stratified to balance hierarchy × purpose × stakes, ensuring every attribute level ap-pears at least once (Appendix C). Every participant’s Scenario 1 shares the same interpersonal setup: the same power dynamic, re-lational context, communication purpose, and stakes level. What differs is the specific content. Each template is instantiated with participant-specific details drawn from recent work communication, such as team names, tools, and terminology. In earlier pilot testing, participants struggled to project themselves into generic workplace situations and could not meaningfully assess which response best captured their style; 

> 5Shang, et al.

grounding scenarios in familiar details resolved this. Scenarios remain hypothetical (“what if. . . ”) rather than retrospective (“re-member when. . . ”), so participants judge potential behavior, not recall. Every participant sees structurally equivalent scenarios set in their own workplace context (Figure 3). Across participants, the content varies but the interpersonal setup stays fixed. For each scenario, three responses are generated under differ-ent conditions and presented in randomized order without labels. Participants rank the responses and rate each on a 5-point align-ment scale (1 = not aligned, 5 = very aligned), then may choose to reveal which condition produced each. The conditions vary in how much personal information the model receives. Generic is a scenario-only baseline where the model sees only the scenario and partner message. Self-Report adds a conversational style descrip-tion derived from the participant’s self-ratings but no behavioral examples. Profiled uses a style description derived from the AS-PECT profile and includes compact behavioral-evidence snippets to ground the response. The three conditions form a controlled comparison. Both Self-Report and Profiled convert their respective CSI ratings into the same style-description format using the same prompt; the differ-ence is whether those ratings come from the participant or from the pipeline’s analysis of their data, isolating the rating source while holding instrument, format, and conversion constant. Self-Report 

uses structured CSI ratings rather than free-form descriptions, so any difference in response quality traces to rating source alone, not input format. Profiled also includes behavioral evidence be-cause evidence extraction is how the pipeline arrives at its ratings: the model scores each item against behavioral instances collected from the person’s data, so evidence and ratings are not separable components. All three conditions receive the same scenario and partner message, and system role prompts are matched to minimize confounds. Ideally, scenario-based evaluation would follow one or more rounds of profile review so that downstream behavior is tested on a refined profile. Because the feasibility of our profiling method was unknown, we treat this as a first-step feasibility study and condition scenario responses on the initial, pre-review profile. 

## 4 Study Design 4.1 Evaluation in a Workplace Setting 

We evaluate in a workplace setting using communication traces that participants can access through enterprise meeting and chat systems. To capture natural, unstructured communication in every-day professional relationships, each session participant exported the prior 90 days of their meeting transcripts, group messages, and direct message chat histories and processed them locally on their own devices. This was a deliberate choice motivated by a few factors. Organizations routinely retain transcripts and chat logs, offering a relatively easy way for participants to retrieve their own data. Working within a single organization also introduces shared norms of tone, tools, and schedules. Conversations are situated in real teams, tools, and deadlines, yet share organizational norms. This reduces cross-domain noise and supports more controlled com-parisons. Next, workplace traces avoid many intimate topics that arise in family and friend communications and are thus easier to audit with minimal intrusion. Finally, we wanted participants to retain control over their personal data. Broad personality batteries (e.g., Big Five) capture stable dis-positions yet remain one step removed from conversational be-havior, and team instruments (e.g., FIRO-B, DiSC, TKI) are often vendor-specific and scenario-bound. To model how people actu-ally communicate, we use the Communication Styles Inventory (CSI) [14], a behaviorally anchored measure developed from a lex-ical study of communication descriptors. CSI contains 92 items 1

distributed across six domain-level scales— Expressiveness , Precise-ness , Verbal Aggressiveness , Questioningness , Emotionality , and Im-pression Manipulativeness —each split into four four-item facets, yielding interpretable axes directly tied to observable speech be-havior rather than intrapersonal cognitions. In the original vali-dation, all domain reliabilities exceeded 𝛼 =0.80 , factor analyses supported the six-domain, 24-facet structure in a large community sample ( 𝑁 =815 ) with replication in a student sample, and the scales showed medium-to-high convergent validity with lexical marker scales and behavior-oriented communication measures while re-maining discriminant from nonbehavioral “about-communication” cognitions [ 14 ]. CSI also shows coherent relations with personality (medium-to-strong associations with HEXACO and NEO dimen-sions), and related work demonstrates incremental validity of com-munication styles for leadership criteria beyond extraversion and conscientiousness, underscoring that styles add predictive signal beyond broad traits [ 4 ]. These properties make CSI a theory-driven, validated, and interpretable scaffold for compressing workplace discourse into facet-level evidence that we can audit transparently later in our pipeline. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the organiza-tion’s research ethics board. 

## 4.2 Participants 

We recruited 𝑁 =20 participants (11 men, 9 women) within a single large organization, aged 18–54, spanning interns to senior-level staff across research, engineering, and program/project manage-ment roles. Tenure at the organization ranged from <6 months to 

>10 years; time-in-role ranged from <3 months to >3 years. Work arrangements varied across fully in-office ( 𝑛 =9), hybrid ( 𝑛 =10 ), and fully remote ( 𝑛 =1). Recruitment was conducted via internal email lists and group channels to intentionally sample diverse roles and collaboration contexts. Participants were compensated $100 for a single 2-hour session. 

## 4.3 Procedure 

Each session lasted two hours and was conducted one-on-one via enterprise videoconferencing. In the first ∼30 minutes, participants installed the study application on their local laptop, processed their exported workplace data locally for profiling, and completed the 92-item CSI self-assessment. The remaining ∼90 minutes followed the two auditing processes outlined in Section 3.3: in profile auditing , participants reviewed model scores with linked behavioral evidence and refined interpre-tations; in behavior auditing , they evaluated personalized scenario 

> 1The original CSI numbers items 1–96; we omit the Inscrutableness facet (4 items) due to poor psychometric properties (see Appendix B). 6Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles

Figure 3: Scenario-based assessment interface 

responses by rating alignment on a 1–5 scale and ranking three anonymized responses generated from different personalization sources, with the within-scenario order randomized. All collection and processing occurred locally on participant devices, including a locally hosted interface for the self-ratings, profile auditing, and ranking and rating for the scenarios. During the self-assessment, participants completed a 92-item version of the CSI scale. Items were presented in the instrument’s original interleaved questionnaire order (facets dispersed across the 1–96 list rather than blocked by facet) to limit response-set bias, and rated on a 1–5 Likert scale. See Appendix B for item order. CSI is a behaviorally anchored measure validated across diverse settings [ 14 ], so constraining ratings to workplace contexts is a standard contextualization aligned with our downstream workplace scenario evaluation. Participants were specifically instructed to judge their work-self only—i.e., to base each rating on how they typically communicate in professional settings and to exclude non-work contexts. 

## 5 Findings 

Participants generally described ASPECT-generated profile to be meaningful and insightful, largely because the extracted evidence               

> 7Shang, et al.
> Dimension Facet Example Item Expressiveness
> Talkativeness “I like to talk a lot.” Conv. Dominance “I often take the lead in a conversation.” Humor “My jokes always draw a lot of attention.” Informality “I address others in a very casual way.”
> Preciseness
> Structuredness “My stories always contain a logical structure.” Thoughtfulness “I think carefully before I say something.” Substantiveness “Conversations with me always involve some important topic.” Conciseness “I don’t need a lot of words to get my message across.”
> Verbal Aggressiveness
> Angriness “I tend to snap at people when I get annoyed.” Authoritarianism “I expect people to obey when I ask them to do something.” Derogatoriness “I have at times made people look like fools.” Nonsupportiveness “I always show a lot of understanding for other people’s prob-lems.” (R)

Table 1: A subset of the CSI scale we used for this system. The full CSI contains 6 dimensions, 23 facets, and 92 items rated on a 5-point scale (1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree). (R) indicates reverse-coded items. See Appendix B for full scale. 

felt concrete and on-point. Participants consistently commented: “The examples are good. . . it did a good job ” (P2); “ I really love how it took the data and the examples. . . for each category ” (P6); “ these examples are actually really good ” and the social-dynamics analysis was “ very interesting ” (P12). P12 also noted the system correctly surfaced multiple humor instances unique to them. Others explicitly accepted the assessments: “ I accept [it]. . . that’s a correct assessment ”(P14). P10 highlighted, “ I think that its assessment of my personality is better than my own assessment of my personality, at least in a professional setting and that is delightful. ”Beyond surface-level linguistic cues, the system recovered latent patterns and habits. P10 noted it correctly inferred a dispositional tendency to “run meetings” even when not leading. P18 and P6 real-ized the “structured” assessments and examples correctly reflected their consistent practice of pre-polishing messages before sending them out, even though they considered themselves naturally un-structured; P13 made this explicit, “ I try very hard to be structured. . . drafted. . . before sending ” and affirmed it generalizes to new-group interactions “ This is how I talk ”. To understand how ASPECT works beyond these impressions, we conducted a systematic mixed method evaluation for our entire pipeline design through two evaluation axes: the accuracy of the inferred profile and its downstream utility for response genera-tion. The following sections (Section 5.1 and Section 5.2) will be organized by two research questions. 

RQ1 Inference alignment - How accurately can an LLM infer individuals’ communication-style profiles from work-place data? Compared to the self-report of over 92 items ( 𝑁 =20 ;

1,840 pairs), alignment is meaningful but imperfect ( MAE =1.39 ,weighted 𝜅 =0.34 , within-person mean 𝜌 =0.39 ; dimension-level 𝜌 

up to 0.72 ). We analyzed the review process as an analytic probe and calibration of this initial inference: in ∼ 17 .7% of facet reviews, participants either adopted the AI score or negotiated a middle ground, indicating that discrepancies often reflect self-bias, con-struct interpretation, or coverage limits rather than pure model error. 

RQ2 Behavioral alignment - Is social imitation via a AS-PECT profile sufficient to produce responses that partici-pants judge as appropriate in real workplace scenarios? In a blinded, within-subject triad (600 evaluations), profile-conditioned responses win 42 .5% of first-place ranks (vs. 32 .5% Generic, 25 .0% 

Self-Report), receive higher mean alignment ratings ( 3.33 vs. 3.09 

vs. 2.95 ), and are preferred over Self-Report (Friedman 𝜒 2=9.31 ,

𝑝 =.0095 ; Wilcoxon 𝑝 =.0067 ) with a small but significant lift over Generic (LMM 𝛽 =0.24 , 𝑝 =.045 ). Preferences depend on person and scenario type. 

## 5.1 RQ1: Inference Alignment 

5.1.1 Statistical Results. 

What we measured and why. To test whether the profiling stage provides a good starting profile (Evaluation frame), we compared ASPECT ’s ratings to participants’ self-ratings. We analyze 𝑁 =20 

participants with 1,840 paired item ratings ( 92 ×20 ), aggregated to 23 facets and 6 dimensions. All self-ratings were anchored to the 

work-self and administered in the instrument’s interleaved order to reduce response sets (Section 4.1). We report: (i) exact match and mean absolute error (MAE) to sum-marize numeric closeness on the 1–5 scale; (ii) bias (signed mean difference) to detect systematic over-/under-estimation by ASPECT; (iii) agreement beyond chance using weighted 𝜅 ; (iv) rank correlations 

𝜌 to capture profile shape (relative highs/lows) either within-person (across items for each participant) or between-people (for a given trait, does ASPECT order participants like self-reports?); and (v) 

ICCs [ICC(A,1) for absolute agreement; ICC(C,1) for consistency] to summarize two-rater reliability. Items are treated as integers; facets and dimensions are arithmetic means of their items. 

Overall alignment. Across items, exact numeric matches occur in 23 .8% of cases; MAE is 1.39 on the 1–5 scale (95% CI [1.34 , 1.45 ]), indicating typical disagreements of about one category. Agreement beyond chance is fair (weighted 𝜅 = 0.34 ). Importantly, within-person rank correlation averages 𝜌 = 0.39 (95% CI [0.31 , 0.44 ]): 

> 8Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles

Table 2: Agreement Summary: Overall, Dimensions, and Facets (Side-by-side)                                                                   

> Overall and Dimensions
> Metric Value 95% CI Exact Match % 23.8 –MAE (absolute difference) 1.39 [1.34, 1.45] Weighted Kappa 0.34 –Mean Within-Person 𝜌 0.39 [0.31, 0.44] Dimension MAE Bias 𝜌
> Verbal Aggressiveness 0.59 -0.40 0.39 Emotionality 0.74 -0.05 0.20 Questioningness 0.74 0.23 0.26 Impression Manipulativeness 0.82 -0.47 -0.03 Expressiveness 1.02 0.99 0.48 Preciseness 1.69 1.69 0.18
> Facets (by 𝜌 )
> Highest agreement
> Facet MAE Bias 𝜌
> Humor 0.81 -0.11 0.43 Sentimentality 1.29 0.79 0.39 Defensiveness 1.80 -1.80 0.38 Angriness 0.51 -0.49 0.34 Worrisomeness 1.54 0.81 0.26
> Lowest agreement
> Thoughtfulness 1.27 1.27 -0.26 Informality 1.51 1.51 -0.21 Derogatoriness 0.91 -0.34 -0.17 Structuredness 1.39 1.39 -0.16 Inquisitiveness 0.90 0.47 -0.15

even when absolute values differ, ASPECT often recovers each person’s relative highs and lows (Table 2). 

Dimension-level patterns. Alignment is heterogeneous by dimen-sion. Verbal Aggressiveness and Emotionality show the smallest errors and fair reliability (e.g., Verbal Aggressiveness: MAE = 0.59 ,bias = −0.40 , between-person 𝜌 = 0.39 , ICC(A,1) = 0.35 ; Emotion-ality: MAE = 0.74 , bias = −0.05 , 𝜌 = 0.20 , ICC(A,1) = 0.31 ), sug-gesting ASPECT captures overt interpersonal tone reasonably well. In contrast, Expressiveness (MAE = 1.03 , bias = +0.99 , 𝜌 = 0.48 )and especially Preciseness (MAE = 1.69 , bias = +1.69 , 𝜌 = 0.18 ,ICCs ≈ 0) show larger numeric gaps with over-rating by ASPECT, indicating a calibration need for structural/organizational traits. 

Facet-level patterns. Facets with clear linguistic signals align bet-ter—for example, Angriness (MAE = 0.51 , bias = −0.49 , 𝜌 = 0.34 ,ICC(A,1) = 0.25 ), Charm (MAE = 0.65 , bias = −0.08 , ICC(A,1) 

= 0.26 ), and Humor (MAE = 0.81 , bias = −0.11 , 𝜌 = 0.43 , ICC(A,1) 

= 0.33 ). Facets that hinge on subtle intent or context, such as Non-supportiveness (MAE = 0.89 , bias = −0.49 , low ICCs) and Inquisi-tiveness (MAE = 0.90 , bias = +0.48 , ICCs ≈ 0), are more challenging. Bland–Altman limits typically span about ±2 points across facets, reflecting genuine between-person variability. 

Item-level examples. High agreement concentrates on directly observable behavior (e.g., “Even when I’m angry, I won’t take it out on someone else.”), where MAE runs ∼ 0.25 –0.50 and exact matches can exceed 60% . Lowest agreement arises for abstract tendencies (e.g., “Conversations with me always involve some important mat-ter.”), where MAE can exceed 2 and 𝜅 ≈ 0.

Response-style check. To rule out scale-use artifacts (e.g., some people avoid 1s/5s), we z-standardized ratings within participant for both self and ASPECT and recomputed correlations. Results are unchanged to three decimals at all levels (items: mean 𝜌 = 0.386 

raw vs. 0.386 standardized; facets: 0.466 vs. 0.466 ; dimensions: 0.720 

vs. 0.720 ), indicating that discrepancies largely reflect substantive differences rather than response styles. Cosine similarities (items 

= 0.384 , facets = 0.468 , dimensions = 0.732 ) tell the same story. 

Within- vs. between-participant agreement. Within individuals, ASPECT preserves profile shape (median 𝜌 in Table 2: items =

0.46 , facets = 0.55 , dimensions = 0.72 ). Between participants, AS-PECT better differentiates who is more Expressive (dimension-level 

𝜌 = 0.48 ) and moderately distinguishes Emotionality (𝜌 = 0.20 ). Between-person discrimination at finer levels is weak (facet/item 𝜌 

often near zero), which is expected given limited observations per facet. 

Reliability context. Where underlying measures are internally consistent, agreement improves. Several self facets have high 𝛼 

(≥ 0.80 ) while ASPECT ’s reliabilities vary (e.g., strong on Conver-sational Dominance, weaker on Talkativeness). Averaged across items, ICC(A,1) = 0.345 and ICC(C,1) = 0.349 indicate fair two-rater reliability, with the strongest dimension-level ICCs for Verbal Ag-gressiveness (up to 0.45 ) and the weakest for Preciseness ( ∼ 0), mirroring MAE/bias patterns. 

Summary. In this sample, ASPECT recovered recognizable com-munication patterns for most participants. Absolute alignment is modest (MAE ≈ 1.4, 𝜅 ≈ 0.34 ), but relative agreement is stronger, especially at the dimension level, suggesting the pipeline preserves the relative shape of individuals’ profiles even when absolute scores diverge. Systematic biases (e.g., over-rating on Preciseness) signal where calibration can help. As we show next, the auditing stage leverages these signals: participants review evidence, negotiate definitions, and adjust scores, turning the initial profile into a user-aligned representation suited for downstream scenarios. 

5.1.2 Auditing as Bidirectional Alignment. Through profile audit-ing, participants compared side-by-side scores, read evidence-linked rationales, clarified how constructs were defined, recalled additional context not captured in the examples, and assessed whether the pipeline behaved consistently. We find that quantitative misalign-ment in Section 5.1.1 were often more nuanced than error alone, and auditing operates as a calibration and reflection step rather than a simple accept/reject check. Participants examined ASPECT’s outputs for each of the 23 facets against their self-assessments while thinking aloud and reviewing 

> 9Shang, et al.

ratings, linked examples, and rationales. This yielded 411 facet-level evaluations (20 participants × 23 facets, minus cases without explicit feedback). Three researchers independently coded a subset, reconciled differences over three rounds, and one researcher verified all instances before thematic analysis. The category counts below are descriptive indicators of the overall distribution. These numbers should be interpreted as approximate rather than exact. We estimate that on the order of 5–10 cases per category could be borderline or mislabeled despite reconciliation. Each audit decision was coded into mutually exclusive categories: 

• Totally Aligned (𝑛 =141 ): Clear agreement; evidence accepted. 

• Misalign–Disapprove (𝑛 =142 ): Participants defended the self-rating and rejected the model’s. 

• Misalign–Middle Ground (𝑛 =42 ): Participants deemed both sides partly right and sought a compromise. 

• Misalign–Approve AI (𝑛 =31 ): Participants revised their self-rating to match the model after reviewing evidence. 

• Unsure/Not Mentioned (𝑛 =55 ): No clear decision or insuffi-cient rationale (often due to limited evidence). 

Interpretation. Through this process, we find auditing both re-duces resolvable error and documents principled, context-dependent differences . Participants changed their initial self-ratings in ∼ 17 .7% 

(73 /411 ) facet reviews: ∼ 7.5% (31 /411 ) fully adopted the AI score and ∼ 10 .2% (42 /411 ) negotiated an explicit middle ground. In our coding process, we noticed a nontrivial share of “misalignments” reflected individuals’ self-rating bias. This indicates auditing pro-duces measurable movement toward evidence when accurately provided. This also means that the pre-audit itemwise statistical metrics (e.g., MAE, 𝜅 in Section 5.1.1) are conservative lower bounds on alignment. We conducted thematic analysis across these five different audit decisions, and the following sections detail common recurring themes. 

5.1.3 Where ASPECT matched participants’ self-assessments. Di-rect, unambiguous alignments happened frequently when it was assessing stable or salient communication styles of participants. For example, P20 on talkativeness: “ I think it aligns with me pretty well. I always have a lot to say. . . I like to explain and elaborate things. . . which are correct. ” P14 on humor: “ AI and I see face to face. ” When ASPECT surfaced structured chains (overviews, bullets, ordered steps), participants confirmed these as accurate habits. P20: “ Consis-tently provides clear sequence. . . bullet points. . . This is what I would love to do actually. ” P10: “ I like that it thinks that my stories always have logical structure. ” Participants who habitually ask questions or float unconventional takes recognized themselves immediately. P10 on unconventionality: “ [I have] a very high rate of hot takes per minute, and the AI seems to be capturing that. ” P13 on inquisi-tiveness: “ I matched the AI on this one. ” P13 on charm: “ This one is actually pretty accurate. . . This is how I talk, especially with a new group of people. ”We also find a portion of exact matches when the system finds 

no behavioral examples for a facet and, by design, instantiated a low (negative) endorsement. For example, for an item under Angriness ,“I tend to snap at people when I get annoyed.,” if no evidence is retrieved the item is set to 1 (Strongly Disagree), reflecting a low level of Angriness . The pattern was clear for from the distribution in Figure 5 in Appendix that these no-evidence cases cluster around negative traits in the constructs. Take Angriness as an example: P2 noted, “ It rated me one. I rated myself 1.75. . . I do believe I’ve never been angry in the workplace ”, and P17 echoed, “ I feel like that is very reflective of me ”. P1 also commented that all the facets under 

Impression Manipulativeness are “ largely in line ” by noting there was “ not as much data for these ”. 

5.1.4 Correct inference and self-rating bias emerge upon reflection. 

In many cases, the examples reminded participants of behaviors they had not fully considered. P13, when shown examples of tense interactions, said “ this actually happened and I actually felt really uneasy at the time, ” acknowledging that they had initially underes-timated their tension. P10 also expressed surprise at the system’s evidence of humor, saying “ I said that I don’t often make other people laugh and it says actually no, you do. . . thanks AI. ” P4 described underestimating their own talkativeness and concluded that “ the AI was right and I was maybe. . . underestimating how much I speak. ”These cases show how surfacing forgotten or minimized evidence led participants to adjust their self-view. Through reflection, participants often realized they had been too critical of themselves. After reviewing examples of their structured communication, P15 noted “ maybe I’m just a little harsh on myself ”. The same participant reconsidered their ratings on conciseness and tension, concluding they had been more capable than they had acknowledged. P16 also recognized that their structured way of “spelling out the steps ” was clearer than they had credited themselves for and said they “ would bump myself up. ”Participants noticed a discrepancy between how they see them-selves or wish to be seen as versus how they present themselves to others. Because participants sometimes self rate by referring to an implicit “ideal self”, while ASPECT can observe only the latter (the enacted, audience-shaped behavior in workplace traces), sev-eral “misalignments” led to interesting self reflection. P13 noted that being talkative in meetings did not imply comfort: “ it doesn’t necessarily mean I’m very comfortable when I talk a lot. ” They also emphasized that their structured style was effortful and profes-sional rather than natural: “ This is. . . not really who I am. It’s about how I want to be presented. ” P10 similarly recognized a gap between aspiration and observation: they preferred to appear less sentimen-tal or worried at work, yet the AI correctly identified higher levels of sentimentality and worry in their communications. For P19, con-versational dominance was behaviorally accurate but role-driven: “part of my job is to direct the conversation, ” not a stable personal style. 

5.1.5 Calibrations are needed to find middle ground. Twenty-four percent of facet evaluations (99/411) resulted in participants seeking a middle ground between self and AI ratings. P4 made this explicit: “I should have rated myself a point higher and it should have rated me a point lower. And then we would have agreed. ” These negotiations occurred through mechanisms supported by information provided in the auditing process, when participants could specify exactly what made each assessment partially correct. Participants recognized that their behavior varied systematically across contexts and some of the misalignments come from that. P13 on talkativeness: “ The workplace situation would prompt me to be very talkative during meetings. It doesn’t necessarily mean I’m 

> 10 Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles

very comfortable. ” They acknowledged the AI correctly captured their meeting behavior (supporting a high rating) while their self-assessment reflected discomfort with that behavior (supporting a lower rating). They eventually decided on a 4/5 compromise that encode both contexts. P19 demonstrated the same pattern with unconventionality: “ I do [toy with wild ideas]... but I don’t do it necessarily in conversation. ”When confronted with mixed behavioral evidence, some partici-pants explicitly calculated averages. P15 on conciseness: “ Is this like 75 examples of short and sustained versus one or two examples of very lengthy? Therefore, four out of five. ” They weren’t confused—-they were computing a frequency-weighted score. P11 made the same calculation for talkativeness, noting “ many of the time I also respond with a yes or a done, ” leading to 4/5 rather than AI’s 5/5. P17 simi-larly reasoned through multiple facets by weighing contradictory evidence: extensive speaking in some meetings, silence in others. Middle ground also emerged when participants discovered mis-matches in measurement definitions. P12 initially rated themselves 1/5 on ingratiation, interpreting it as sycophancy. After seeing examples of routine compliments, they did not fully accept the AI’s 4/5 but chose 2-3 to reflect both their new understanding and their moderate use of compliments. This pattern repeated across constructs with loaded terms. P15 accepted being humorous but rejected “ teasing ” as a characterization. P19 agreed they used charm but disputed “ flirting. ” Participants corrected their understanding while maintaining boundaries around unwanted labels. 

5.1.6 Sources of mischaracterizations and errors. To clearly lay out and compare the types of mischaracterizations together, we presented those in Table 3, summarizing sources of these issues and reasons participants gave when self and model scores diverged. 

## 5.2 RQ2: From Profiles to Social Performance 

While ASPECT demonstrates meaningful inference of communica-tion styles (Section 4.1), accurate trait assessment does not automat-ically translate to appropriate social representation. We therefore examined whether inferred profiles generated contextually appro-priate responses across 10 workplace scenarios, comparing three response conditions: Generic , Self-Report , and Profiled .

5.2.1 Statistical Results. Across 600 evaluations (20 participants 

× 10 scenarios × 3 conditions), responses generated from Profiled 

were preferred over the alternatives on aggregate. 

Win rates. Profiled responses were ranked first in 42.5% of scenar-ios (85/200, 95% CI [35.9%, 49.4%]), compared to 32.5% for Generic (65/200) and 25.0% for Self-Report (50/200, 95% CI [19.5%, 31.4%]). 

Rankings. Mean ranks followed the same hierarchy: Profiled (𝑀 =

1.84 , 𝑆𝐷 = 0.82 ), Generic (𝑀 = 2.00 , 𝑆𝐷 = 0.81 ), Self-Report (𝑀 =

2.15 , 𝑆𝐷 = 0.79 ). To test whether these differences were system-atic, we conducted a Friedman test (a non-parametric alternative to repeated-measures ANOVA appropriate for ordinal ranks). Results showed a significant main effect of condition ( 𝜒 2 = 9.31 , 𝑝 = .0095 ,Kendall’s 𝑊 = 0.023 ). Post-hoc Wilcoxon signed-rank tests with Holm–Bonferroni correction were used to compare conditions pair-wise. Only the comparison between Profiled and Self-Report re-mained significant ( 𝑝 = .0067 , 𝑟 = .22 ), while differences between 

Profiled and Generic , and between Generic and Self, did not reach significance. 

Ratings. On the 5-point alignment scale, Profiled again led ( 𝑀 =

3.33 , 𝑆𝐷 = 1.29 ), followed by Generic (𝑀 = 3.09 , 𝑆𝐷 = 1.28 ) and 

Self-Report (𝑀 = 2.95 , 𝑆𝐷 = 1.19 ). Because ratings are continuous and approximately interval-scaled, we analyzed them using linear mixed-effects models with random intercepts for participant and scenario. The simplified model (due to convergence limits) revealed that Profiled were rated significantly higher than Generic responses (𝛽 = 0.24 , 𝑝 = .045 ), while Self-Report did not significantly differ (𝛽 = −0.14 , 𝑝 = .26 ). Pairwise Cohen’s 𝑑 confirmed small but consistent effects: 𝑑 = 0.30 for Profiled vs. Self-Report , 𝑑 = 0.19 for 

Profiled vs. Generic .

Summary. On aggregate, the data suggest a preference ordering 

Profiled > Generic > Self-Report . Participants’ own self-reported profiles performed worst, even below Generic baselines. This sug-gests that CSI ratings alone, without behavioral grounding, do not translate into more aligned responses; adding behavioral evidence from communication history improves alignment within our sam-ple. 

5.2.2 Individual Variation Dominates Aggregate Patterns. Despite aggregate preferences for Profiled -generated responses, individ-ual differences were substantial. Random slopes analysis revealed wide variability in condition effects (SD = 0.87 for Self-Report , SD = 0.94 for Profiled ), exceeding the conventional 0.5 threshold for meaningful heterogeneity. Nine participants (45%) showed strong preferences for Profiled ,two (10%) strongly preferred Self-Report , and the remaining nine (45%) exhibited mixed or weak preferences. For example, Partic-ipant 2 consistently rated Profiled responses over a point higher than Generic on the 5-point scale, whereas Participant 19 showed the opposite, preferring Self-Report by nearly a point. Agreement across participants was extremely low (Kendall’s 

𝑊 = 0.077 ), highlighting that individuals showed low concordance on what constituted a good response. What one participant rated as perfectly aligned ( 5/5), another might rate as misaligned ( 2/5). Scenario-specific patterns were also observed (e.g., Profiled domi-nated Scenario 1, whereas Generic responses were favored in Sce-nario 9), though systematic scenario-type effects require further analysis. On aggregate, Profiled responses were preferred over Self-Report and Generic responses, but individual variations dom-inated the pattern . However, the strong individual differences observed here underscore the need for adaptive personalization, allowing users to calibrate how much the system should rely on behavioral inference versus self-report. 

5.2.3 Signals of Condition-based Preferences. Figure 4 shows, for each of ten scenarios, which condition won and how strong the agreement was. Bar color is the winning condition ( Generic , Self-Report , or Profiled ) chosen by the majority of participants. Bar height is the win margin, defined as the number of participants who ranked the winner first minus the number who ranked the runner-up first. The label “n=” on each bar is how many of the 20 participants selected the winner. Across 10 scenarios, Profiled wins in 5, Generic wins in 4, and Self-Report wins in 1. Large margins 

> 11

Shang, et al. 

Theme Concise definition Typical signals Representative exemplar T1. Coverage & observ-ability gaps Data limita-tion 

Ratings inferred from a narrow slice of digi-tal/recorded data; misses offline talk, pre-record small talk, multimodal cues, internal states , and rare-but-salient incidents. Channel/recording limits; observer effects; offline/in-person only; internalized affect; low-frequency events not visible. “We do 5 minutes of informal talk be-fore recording; AI only sees recorded for-mal content.” [P15] “Philosophical discus-sions happen offline (in person), not on Teams.” [P5] “Comments affect me emo-tionally, but I don’t show it in written communication.” [P11] 

T2. Situational norms misread as traits 

Method issue 

Role-, task-, or meeting-driven behavior (e.g., PM leading, presentations, risk triage) inferred as stable dispositional style. PM/presenter talk required; task-necessitated struc-ture/precision; professional risk language ≠ personal anxiety; discretion ≠ concealingness. “Presentations require me to talk; that doesn’t mean I’m generally talkative.” [P2] “‘Worry’ here reflects PM risk man-agement, not personal anxiety.” [P15] “Swap in any teammate in these meetings and they’d also look dominant.” [P16] 

T3. Tone & valence misinterpretation Fun-damental LLM limitation 

(amplified by data limits) Pragmatics are literalized: sarcasm, playful banter, emojis, and praise are reinterpreted as aggression, anxiety, manipulation, or command-giving. Sarcasm literalized; joking directives read as author-itarian; emoji/politeness read as stress; praise/cheer-leading ≠ ingratiation/charm. “The ‘dirty green walls’ line was sarcasm, not sentimentality.” [P14] “The ‘Don’t do it’ interruption was playful banter with close colleagues.” [P19] “Praise for in-terns was genuine appreciation, not a manipulation tactic.” [P15] 

T4. Construct / item misalignment Method issue 

Participant and instrument use different definitions or item scopes (operationalization drift; ambiguous boundaries). Constructive challenge ≠ argumentative; technical theory ≠ philosophicalness; item asks about tears vs. AI coding general emotion; politeness ≠ sentimen-tality. “Constructive challenge ≠ argumenta-tive.” [P1] “Theory/framework talk is technical, not ‘philosophical.”’ [P2] “The item asks about tears; the AI coded gen-eral emotion instead.” [P12] 

T5. Evidence use &scoring integrity prob-lems Method + tooling is-sue 

Overreach from single examples; cherry-picking brief messages; contradictory facet pairings; speaker misattribution; contamination; inconsistent “no evi-dence → mid score” logic. Single-example inflation; brevity cherry-pick; logi-cal contradictions; mic-host attribution; third-party input contamination. “One worry example shouldn’t make all worry items 5/5.” [P2] “The AI rated me both concise and talks-a-lot—contradictory.” [P11] “As meeting host, others’ comments were attributed to me.” [P4] 

Table 3: Typology of sources of AI–self misalignment (RQ1), grouped by root cause: Data limitations (T1), Method issues (T2, T4, T5), and Fundamental LLM limitations (T3). Themes are not mutually exclusive; multi-coding is allowed. 

Cluster N Mean Win Rate Mean Rating Margin Participants 

Prefers Profiled 10 0.60 0.73 P2, P4, P6, P10, P12, P13, P15, P16, P17, P18 Prefers Generic 4 0.57 0.75 P1, P5, P8, P9 Prefers Self-Report 2 0.70 0.85 P14, P19 Mixed / No Clear Preference 4 – 0.05 P3, P7, P11, P20 

Table 4: Participant clusters. We clustered participants by comparing which condition ( Generic , Self-Report , Profiled ) most often “won” on three summary metrics: win rate (proportion of first-place ranks), mean rank, and mean rating. To avoid over-interpreting small differences, we required either (a) a condition to win at least two of the three metrics and show a meaningful margin ( ≥ 0.20 in win rate, ≥ 0.25 in rating, or ≥ 0.20 in rank), or (b) to win one metric with a strong margin ( ≥ 0.30 ,

≥ 0.40 , ≥ 0.30 respectively). These thresholds were chosen to align with the observed separations in our data (median margins 

≈ 0.30 for win rate, 0.55 for rating, 0.40 for rank, all with IQRs spanning 0.1–0.7), ensuring they capture differences larger than typical within-participant variability. Participants without a clear advantage for any condition were labeled as Mixed. Sensitivity checks with slightly stricter or looser cutoffs shifted at most one participant per cluster, suggesting our results are robust. 

indicate strong agreement (e.g., S3 and S8); small margins (e.g., S9) indicate mixed preferences despite a clear majority. We cross-analyzed each scenario’s winner and margin against its APRACE metadata (purpose, hierarchy, familiarity, stakes, formality, and mode) to identify patterns between scenario type and preferred condition. We focus on the preference for Generic and Profiled since it is difficult to see pattern given Self-Report has only one win and the margin is minimal. Participants tend to prefer Profiled in scenarios when the task is tightly defined and success depends on the usual way of organizing and speaking. This includes explaining their work to a distant peer (S1), responding in chat when a peer questions their approach (S3), planning a new initiative with a manager in a formal setting (S4), giving a concise standup update (S7), and discussing credit attribution with a distant peer (S9). These settings reward structure, pacing, and the balance between firmness and support that show up in a person’s real communication history. On the other hand, participants tend to prefer Generic when the goal is light coordination or the emotional tone is unclear. This 

12 Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles 

Figure 4: Win margin of each condition across participants and 10 scenarios. 

includes setting the tone at a weekly check-in (S1), handling a last-minute schedule change (S5), acknowledging an unexpected process change (S8), and planning a team celebration (S10). This is likely because neutral, generic phrasing is sufficient and safer in those scenarios. We further analyzed qualitative data of participants’ rationales to understand this. Overall participants showed a general preference for responses that sounded more like themselves or their personal style. However, across the scenarios we noticed patterns of conditions that better captured participants’ style. We noticed that participants who pre-ferred Profiled often also referenced how the scenario captured a fuller perspective of how they wanted to be captured, including de-tails on their enthusiasm or approach. For instance, P10 highlights this by indicating that responses were “ very specific about what we would actually do, which I feel like is just...that’s how I would talk in a hallway or like that’s how I would talk with a co-worker. ” However, this perspective varied across participants. In fact, participants who preferred Generic did not like the level of excitement or emotion that may have been out of the norm for how they communicate at work. Specifically, P9 highlighted that “ It is trying to be very personal to me, but it is the wrong per-sonal. And so I am deeply uncomfortable with it because I’m like, this isn’t my voice. ” Finally, participants who preferred Self-Report often cited the low-jargon, more universally collegial way of connecting with colleagues. P14 referred to the “ safe ” or “ corporate thing to do ”when selecting responses. P19 also went on to highlight how these responses were more aligned with their role as a leader. These di-vergent preferences suggest that no single personalization strategy fits all users; effective systems must let individuals choose their level of stylistic adaptation. 

## 6 Discussion 6.1 What we learned about building data-grounded profiles 

Our design, implementation, and evaluation of ASPECT revealed three factors that shaped profile quality in our study: (1) having data to ground profile to concrete behavioral evidence; (2) a good psychometric scale that fits the person’s profiling needs; and (3) keeping users in the loop to add contextual insight into profile data and provide profile evaluations. 

Data. In our study, participants reviewed ASPECT’s construct ratings by inspecting behavioral evidence and short rationales; this grounded design led them to revise or negotiate their self-ratings. Going forward, we can strengthen this process by showing uncer-tainty and coverage, preserving provenance for each example, or keeping versioned audit trails. These directions align with work on documentation and auditing—Model Cards for model report-ing [ 38 ], Datasheets for dataset transparency [ 17 ], and internal algorithmic auditing frameworks that support appropriate trust calibration [32, 47]. 

A good scale. In this work, we used the Communication Styles Inventory (CSI) to test the ASPECT framework, and our findings show that not all CSI facets are equally observable in workplace text and some invite interpretation mismatches at the facet level. This is precisely where review helped participants clarify. The implication is to support instrument interpretation alignment or even tailoring with alternative communication scales when a construct is ill-fitted for a user or communication channel. Prior validation work on CSI provides the psychometric grounding and also highlights where adaptations make sense; future versions of ASPECT can learn data-driven observability maps (i.e., which facets are detectable for a given data source) and recommend the right instrument per con-text [14, 16]. 

Users must stay in the loop as reviewers. One finding from our study is that the review workflow: side-by-side comparisons, 

> 13 Shang, et al.

linked evidence, and explicit user actions to calibrate assessment supported meaningful calibration. Future systems should extend this approach with more features to support both profile and behav-ior review. For example, the system could implement more advanced ways for counter-evidence retrieval to combat confirmation bias and coverage diagnostics that surface missing data. Moreover, the system could afford user examining the change in alignment by showing instant change in response style across downstream tasks. Automated evaluation could also be implemented based on some user manual review history to help quickly flag problematic cases. These features are consistent with established guidance on algo-rithmic auditing, documentation, and trust-calibrated human-AI collaboration [17, 23, 32, 38, 47]. 

## 6.2 Representation boundaries and sources of mischaracterization 

Besides the instances where users calibrated their own score, we also found various types of true mischaracterizations (Table 3). Interestingly, not all mischaracterizations should be completely removed, as many participants wish their digital representation to be not exactly like them. The specific design of ASPECT maps out two boundaries in the generated profile through data input and the specific choice of psychometric constructs. That means, the gen-erated profile is constructing a person as how they would behave in a socially constructed context, as P14 described as showing the “local minima/maxima” of their characteristics. In our study, this context is naturally the work version of self. We find that Partic-ipants often defended context-appropriate self-presentation and drew lines between their natural tendency, learned professional behavior, and desired workplace image. In these cases, “creating a behavioral average” would actually be undesirable, as they would want to hide away part of self at work. These findings argue for boundary-respecting profiles: constrain by constructs (what to mea-sure) and by data source (what type of behaviors to be profiled). This aligns with classic accounts of impression management [ 19 ] and politeness/face-work [ 6 ], as well as audience design and accommo-dation—people adapt style to addressees and power relations [ 5, 18 ]. Because our review process made these boundaries visible, future work could explore context-scoped representations: allow users to pin profiles per context and usage, preview responses under those settings, and opt-in to downplay traits they can exhibit but prefer not to signal in a given setting. For example, a “workplace casual chat” agent tuned for warmth and humor. Other divergences in Table 3 reflect actionable limits in our current system. To address these issues, future work could explore supplementing textual data with other modalities of data sources as well as engineering more validations to model outputs. 

Systematic biases as a learned insight. Our evaluation revealed that the pipeline systematically over-rates certain dimensions, par-ticularly Preciseness (MAE =1.69, bias =+1.69, ICC ≈0) and Expres-siveness (bias =+0.99). Two mechanisms explain this pattern. First, when the pipeline finds no behavioral evidence for a construct, it as-signs a low endorsement score. This is informative for traits whose absence in workplace text is meaningful (e.g., no evidence of angry outbursts likely indicates low Angriness), but less so for traits that are simply hard to observe in text (e.g., internal deliberation before speaking). Second, workplace communication is filtered through professional norms: messages tend to be edited, structured, and purposeful, which inflates ratings on constructs like Preciseness regardless of the individual’s natural tendencies. These biases were not predictable before the study; they emerged through review, as participants flagged constructs where the data systematically over-stated their traits. This finding directly informs future calibration work: once bias patterns are identified across a population of users, automated corrections become feasible (e.g., dimension-specific shrinkage or coverage-based weighting). Our study provides an initial empirical basis for designing such corrections in this setting. 

## 6.3 Using ASPECT framework in practice 

Mimetic agents you can review and deploy. In our scenarios, 

Profiled responses were preferred over Generic and Self-Report con-ditions on aggregate, and participants generally considered the response generated is aligned with their style. This means these profiles are already actionable for context-specific agents. ASPECT produces a “portable” profile that can be used directly as an agent prompt once generated. However, we found that participants ex-hibited a threshold effect in their tolerance for misalignment. P9, explains this uncanny valley of social representation in detail: “ I can wear a generic Halloween face mask that’s not molded to my face at all, and that’s fine. But if I have something that’s molded improperly to my face, it’s deeply uncomfortable. ” This captures a fundamental challenge for mimetic agents: imperfect personalization often feels worse than no personalization at all. As participants reviewed the scenarios, we noticed the formation of an implicit alignment with interpretation. For instance, participants also mentioned 95% vs 70% type of alignment. There is an unspoken threshold of when it could be better to go with the Generic option vs. Profiled the profiled option. At times it felt like when it came down to accu-rate representation without achieving it, the more unsettling the experience became. This suggests that mimetic AI systems must either achieve very high fidelity or clearly signal their limitations to avoid falling into this uncomfortable middle ground where users experience their digital selves as distorted rather than absent. These distortions and working through the evolutions of them is a field of work that should continue to be studied across contexts. 

Evidence-based profile for self-reflection. Although we did not intend to design ASPECT as a reflection tool, participants re-peatedly engaged in reflective practices: they reconsidered their habits when reading linked examples and justifications. Interest-ingly, though the review involves reading lots of text, most partici-pants found it engaging and interesting to “learn about themselves”. This opens up opportunities to leverage the ASPECT framework and this type of individual social profiles to support self-reflection practices, aligning with literature on self-explanation effect for deeper understanding [ 10 ], and feedback-intervention theory for crafting feedback that improves performance without triggering defensiveness [28]. 

A de-biasing aid for psychometric assessments. We found that seeing evidence and rationales upon misalignment triggers calibration and reduces bias in self-assessment. This is in line with 

> 14

Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles 

a large literature showing that self-assessments are noisy and bi-ased, from classic meta-analysis on limited validity [ 36 ] to Dun-ning–Kruger miscalibration [ 31 ], and to SOKA results and meta-analyses where informants sometimes predict behavior better than the self [ 11 , 50 ]. ASPECT’s approach could make psychometric self-assessments more valid by using data inference as an external anchor and observer of an individuals’ actions. 

## 7 Limitations 

Limited scope. For practical reasons elaborated in Section 4.1, we tested ASPECT on only one source of data (workplace conversa-tions), one psychometric scale (CSI), and participants from a single organization. Recruiting within one organization was necessary for trust (participants knew their data stayed within enterprise boundaries) but limits generalizability. Our 20 participants skewed toward technical roles comfortable with AI systems. We cannot claim it generalizes to all personal communication, other scales, or different organizational cultures. The use of 90-day window on textual data missed longer-term behavioral patterns and richer information about the individual. Hence, we would recommend carefully building upon findings of our work and also encourage future work to explore this with more general populations, other data sources, and more modalities of data. 

Model constraints. The choice of prompting instead of more advanced techniques such as fine-tuning limited our ability to cor-rect systematic biases; this choice was largely driven by the time and cost of running the study with 20 participants. Also, although we iterated our pipeline extensively before running the study, some fundamental problems with LLMs could not be avoided via better prompts alone. For example, we observed a few cases of hallu-cinated outputs as the LLM attributed other speakers’ words to participants in meeting transcripts, and occasionally added sen-tences that didn’t exist in the data. However, these were mostly surface-level additions, not fabrication of new data that would affect assessments. 

Longitudinal evaluation upon deployment. Our 2-hour ses-sions captured only initial reactions. The 10 workplace scenarios were hypothetical, but future work could explore if participants’ preferences hold when AI responses have real consequences for their relationships and reputation. Participants also did not experi-ence extended use in practice. Future work should deploy this in real life and test whether the auditing improvements persist over time or degrade as contexts change. 

## 8 Conclusion 

We presented ASPECT, an approach for building social profiles from communication data. ASPECT constructs social style profiles that make inferences from observed social interactions to assess val-idated psychometric constructs. In a 20-participant case study with workplace communication scenarios, ASPECT produced initial pro-files that participants largely recognized as capturing their personal communication patterns. Our findings also revealed systematic biases on a few dimensions. The profile review phase supported calibration, moving participants toward more aligned profiles. The scenario-based evaluation shows that ASPECT-generated profiled responses were preferred over generic and self-report baselines on aggregate, with preferences varying across individuals and sce-nario types. We characterize sources of misalignment and surface challenges around data coverage, boundaries of self-representation, and the desirable degree of representation fidelity. Our findings from one workplace setting provide an empirical starting point; the natural next steps are to vary the psychometric instrument, broaden the data sources, and study how profiles hold up over time and across organizational cultures. 

## References 

[1] Character.AI 2025. Character.AI . Character.AI. https://character.ai/ Founded 2021; public beta launched September 16, 2022; founders Noam Shazeer and Daniel de Freitas. [2] Lisa P Argyle, Christopher A Bail, Ethan C Busby, Joshua R Gubler, Thomas Howe, Christopher Rytting, Taylor Sorensen, and David Wingate. 2023. Leveraging AI for democratic discourse: Chat interventions can improve online political conversations at scale. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, 41 (2023), e2311627120. [3] Rebekah Lee Baik, Stephanie Lee, Serena Jinchen Xie, Wang Liao, Elina H Hwang, and Weichao Yuwen. 2025. Adapting Communication Styles in Health Chatbot using Large Language Models to Support Family Caregivers from Multicultural Backgrounds. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–8. [4] Angelique Bakker-Pieper and Reinout E de Vries. 2013. The incremental validity of communication styles over personality traits for leader outcomes. Human Performance 26, 1 (2013), 1–19. [5] Allan Bell. 1984. Language style as audience design. Language in society 13, 2 (1984), 145–204. [6] Penelope Brown. 1987. Politeness: Some universals in language usage. [7] Souradip Chakraborty, Jiahao Qin, Evrard Garcelon, Alessandro Lazaric, Matteo Pirotta, and Andrea Zanette. 2024. MaxMin-RLHF: Alignment with diverse human preferences. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning .[8] Ti-Chung Cheng, Carmen Badea, Christian Bird, Thomas Zimmermann, Robert DeLine, Nicole Forsgren, and Denae Ford. 2024. GEMS: Generative Expert Metric System through Iterative Prompt Priming. arXiv:2410.00880 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.00880 [9] Yi Fei Cheng, Hirokazu Shirado, and Shunichi Kasahara. 2025. Conversational Agents on Your Behalf: Opportunities and Challenges of Shared Autonomy in Voice Communication for Multitasking. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–18. [10] Michelene TH Chi, Nicholas De Leeuw, Mei-Hung Chiu, and Christian LaVancher. 1994. Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding. Cognitive science 18, 3 (1994), 439–477. [11] Brian S Connelly and Deniz S Ones. 2010. An other perspective on person-ality: meta-analytic integration of observers’ accuracy and predictive validity. 

Psychological bulletin 136, 6 (2010), 1092. [12] Paul T Costa and Robert R McCrae. 2008. The revised neo personality inventory (neo-pi-r). The SAGE handbook of personality theory and assessment 2, 2 (2008), 179–198. [13] Lee J Cronbach and Paul E Meehl. 1955. Construct validity in psychological tests. 

Psychological bulletin 52, 4 (1955), 281. [14] Reinout E De Vries, Angelique Bakker-Pieper, Femke E Konings, and Barbara Schouten. 2013. The communication styles inventory (CSI) a six-dimensional behavioral model of communication styles and its relation with personality. 

Communication Research 40, 4 (2013), 506–532. [15] Robert F DeVellis and Carolyn T Thorpe. 2021. Scale development: Theory and applications . Sage publications. [16] Pierluigi Diotaiuti, Giuseppe Valente, Stefania Mancone, and Angela Grambone. 2020. Psychometric properties and a preliminary validation study of the Italian brief version of the communication styles inventory (CSI-B/I). Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020), 1421. [17] Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daumé Iii, and Kate Crawford. 2021. Datasheets for datasets. 

Commun. ACM 64, 12 (2021), 86–92. [18] Howard Giles, Nikolas Coupland, and Justine Coupland. 1991. Accommodation theory: Communication, context, and consequence. Contexts of accommodation: Developments in applied sociolinguistics 1 (1991), 1–68. [19] Erving Goffman. 1959. The presentation of self in everyday life, Double Day Anchor. Garden City, NY (1959). [20] Lewis R Goldberg. 1993. The structure of phenotypic personality traits. American psychologist 48, 1 (1993), 26. 15 Shang, et al. 

[21] Jeffrey T Hancock, Mor Naaman, and Karen Levy. 2020. AI-mediated commu-nication: Definition, research agenda, and ethical considerations. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 25, 1 (2020), 89–100. [22] Jess Hohenstein and Malte Jung. 2018. AI-supported messaging: An investigation of human-human text conversation with AI support. In Extended abstracts of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–6. [23] Sarah Susanna Hoppler, Robin Segerer, and Jana Nikitin. 2022. The Six Com-ponents of Social Interactions: Actor, Partner, Relation, Activities, Context, and Evaluation. Frontiers in Psychology Volume 12 - 2021 (2022). doi:10.3389/fpsyg. 2021.743074 [24] Jessica Huang, Ig-Jae Kim, and Dongwook Yoon. 2025. Mirror to Companion: Exploring Roles, Values, and Risks of AI Self-Clones through Story Completion. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–15. [25] Angel Hsing-Chi Hwang, John Oliver Siy, Renee Shelby, and Alison Lentz. 2024. In whose voice?: examining AI agent representation of people in social inter-action through generative speech. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 224–245. [26] Maurice Jakesch, Megan French, Xiao Ma, Jeffrey T Hancock, and Mor Naaman. 2019. AI-mediated communication: How the perception that profile text was written by AI affects trustworthiness. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–13. [27] Taewook Kim, Jung Soo Lee, Zhenhui Peng, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2019. Love in lyrics: An exploration of supporting textual manifestation of affection in social messaging. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–27. [28] Avraham N Kluger and Angelo DeNisi. 1996. The effects of feedback interventions on performance: a historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory. Psychological bulletin 119, 2 (1996), 254. [29] Michal Kosinski, Sandra C Matz, Samuel D Gosling, Vesselin Popov, and David Stillwell. 2015. Facebook as a research tool for the social sciences: Opportunities, challenges, ethical considerations, and practical guidelines. American psychologist 

70, 6 (2015), 543. [30] Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell, and Thore Graepel. 2013. Private traits and attributes are predictable from digital records of human behavior. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 110, 15 (2013), 5802–5805. [31] Justin Kruger and David Dunning. 1999. Unskilled and unaware of it: how diffi-culties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments. 

Journal of personality and social psychology 77, 6 (1999), 1121. [32] John D Lee and Katrina A See. 2004. Trust in automation: Designing for appro-priate reliance. Human factors 46, 1 (2004), 50–80. [33] Patrick Yung Kang Lee, Ning F Ma, Ig-Jae Kim, and Dongwook Yoon. 2023. Speculating on risks of AI clones to selfhood and relationships: Doppelganger-phobia, identity fragmentation, and living memories. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-computer Interaction 7, CSCW1 (2023), 1–28. [34] Joanne Leong, John Tang, Edward Cutrell, Sasa Junuzovic, Gregory Paul Baribault, and Kori Inkpen. 2024. Dittos: Personalized, embodied agents that participate in meetings when you are unavailable. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 8, CSCW2 (2024), 1–28. [35] Xiao Ma, Jeffrey T Hancock, Kenneth Lim Mingjie, and Mor Naaman. 2017. Self-disclosure and perceived trustworthiness of Airbnb host profiles. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work and social computing . 2397–2409. [36] Paul A Mabe and Stephen G West. 1982. Validity of self-evaluation of ability: A review and meta-analysis. Journal of applied Psychology 67, 3 (1982), 280. [37] Reid McIlroy-Young, Jon Kleinberg, Siddhartha Sen, Solon Barocas, and Ashton Anderson. 2022. Mimetic models: Ethical implications of ai that acts like you. In 

Proceedings of the 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society . 479–490. [38] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. 2019. Model cards for model reporting. In Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency . 220–229. [39] Lene Nielsen and Kira Storgaard Hansen. 2014. Personas is applicable: a study on the use of personas in Denmark. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1665–1674. [40] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al . 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022), 27730–27744. [41] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology . 1–22. [42] Joon Sung Park, Carolyn Q Zou, Aaron Shaw, Benjamin Mako Hill, Carrie Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Robb Willer, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2024. Generative agent simulations of 1,000 people. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10109 

(2024). [43] Nilay Patel. 2024. The CEO of Zoom wants AI clones in meet-ings . https://www.theverge.com/2024/6/3/24168733/zoom-ceo-ai-clones-digital-twins-videoconferencing-decoder-interview Accessed: 2024-09-04. [44] Ellie Pavlick and Joel Tetreault. 2016. An empirical analysis of formality in online communication. Transactions of the association for computational linguistics 4(2016), 61–74. [45] Sriyash Poddar, Yanming Wan, Hamish Ivison, Siddharth Choudhury, and Natasha Jaques. 2024. Personalizing Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback with Variational Preference Learning. In NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Pluralistic Alignment .[46] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 (2023). [47] Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes. 2020. Closing the AI accountability gap: Defining an end-to-end frame-work for internal algorithmic auditing. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency . 33–44. [48] Omar Shaikh, Shardul Sapkota, Shan Rizvi, Eric Horvitz, Joon Sung Park, Diyi Yang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2025. Creating General User Models from Com-puter Use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10831 (2025). [49] Ashish Sharma, Inna W Lin, Adam S Miner, David C Atkins, and Tim Althoff. 2021. Towards facilitating empathic conversations in online mental health support: A reinforcement learning approach. In Proceedings of the web conference 2021 .194–205. [50] Simine Vazire. 2010. Who knows what about a person? The self–other knowledge asymmetry (SOKA) model. Journal of personality and social psychology 98, 2 (2010), 281. [51] Wu Youyou, Michal Kosinski, and David Stillwell. 2015. Computer-based per-sonality judgments are more accurate than those made by humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 4 (2015), 1036–1040. [52] Ivan Zakazov, Mikolaj Boronski, Lorenzo Drudi, and Robert West. 2024. Assessing Social Alignment: Do Personality-Prompted Large Language Models Behave Like Humans? arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16772 (2024). [53] Shuo Zhou, Zhe Zhang, and Timothy Bickmore. 2017. Adapting a persuasive conversational agent for the Chinese culture. In 2017 international conference on culture and computing (culture and computing) . IEEE, 89–96. [54] Caleb Ziems, Minzhi Li, Anthony Zhang, and Diyi Yang. 2022. Inducing positive perspectives with text reframing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02952 (2022). 

## Appendix A Evidence Extraction Schema 

For each behavioral evidence instance extracted during profiling (Section 3.1), the pipeline produces a structured context summary and a short conversational excerpt. Placeholders are shown in code 

font. 

Context (per example) 

{"situational_background": "What was happening (meeting purpose, topic, timing)", "social_dynamics": "Who was involved and their role relative to {user_name}", "communication_setting": "1-on-1 vs group; formal vs informal; planned vs spontaneous; stakes", "behavioral_analysis": "How context shaped {user_name} 's { facet_name}; would it differ elsewhere?", "contextual_significance": "Why this demonstrates { facet_name} given the situation and dynamics" }

Conversational Excerpt (2–5 turns) 

[{"speaker": "User", "message": "Target user 's message ..."}, {"speaker": "OtherPartyName", "message": "Response ..."}, {"speaker": "User", "message": "Follow-up ..."} 

16 Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles 

> ]

## B Communication Styles Inventory (CSI) -Complete Scale 

The Communication Styles Inventory (CSI) [ 14 ] consists of 92 items organized into 6 dimensions and 23 facets. All items are rated on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree). Items marked with (R) are reverse-coded. 

Dimension 1: Expressiveness (X). Talkativeness. 

1. I always have a lot to say. 25. I have a hard time keeping myself silent when around other people. 49. I am never the one who breaks a silence by starting to talk. (R) 73. I like to talk a lot. 

Conversational Dominance. 

7. I often take the lead in a conversation. 31. Most of the time, other people determine what the discus-sion is about, not me. (R) 55. I often determine which topics are talked about during a conversation. 79. I often determine the direction of a conversation. 

Humor. 

13. Because of my humor, I’m often the centre of attention among a group of people. 37. I have a hard time being humorous in a group. (R) 61. My jokes always draw a lot of attention. 85. I often manage to make others burst out laughing. 

Informality. 

19. I communicate with others in a distant manner. (R) 43. I behave somewhat formally when I meet someone. (R) 67. I address others in a very casual way. 91. I come across as somewhat stiff when dealing with people. (R) 

## Dimension 2: Preciseness (P) 

Structuredness. 

2. When I tell a story, the different parts are always clearly related to each other. 26. I sometimes find it hard to tell a story in an organized way. (R) 50. I always express a clear chain of thoughts when I argue a point. 74. My stories always contain a logical structure. 

Thoughtfulness. 

8. I think carefully before I say something. 32. I weigh my answers carefully. 56. The statements I make are not always well thought out. (R) 80. I choose my words with care. 

Substantiveness. 

14. Conversations with me always involve some important topic. 38. You won’t hear me jabbering about superficial or shallow matters. 62. I am someone who can often talk about trivial things. (R) 86. I rarely if ever just chatter away about something. 

Conciseness. 

20. I don’t need a lot of words to get my message across. 44. Most of the time, I only need a few words to explain some-thing. 68. I am somewhat long-winded when I need to explain some-thing. (R) 92. With a few words I can usually clarify my point to every-body. 

## Dimension 3: Verbal Aggressiveness (VA) 

Angriness. 

3. If something displeases me, I sometimes explode with anger. 27. Even when I’m angry, I won’t take it out on someone else. (R) 51. I tend to snap at people when I get annoyed. 75. I can sometimes react somewhat irritably to people. 

Authoritarianism. 

9. I am not very likely to tell someone what they should do. (R) 33. I sometimes insist that others do what I say. 57. I expect people to obey when I ask them to do something. 81. When I feel others should do something for me, I ask for it in a demanding tone of voice. 

Derogatoriness. 

15. I never make fun of anyone in a way that might hurt their feelings. (R) 39. I have at times made people look like fools. 63. I have been known to be able to laugh at people in their face. 87. I have humiliated someone in front of a crowd. 

Nonsupportiveness. 

21. I can listen well. (R) 45. I always show a lot of understanding for other people’s problems. (R) 69. I always take time for someone if they want to talk to me. (R) 93. I always treat people with a lot of respect. (R) 

## Dimension 4: Questioningness (Q) 

Unconventionality. 

4. I sometimes toss bizarre ideas into a group discussion. 28. I often say unexpected things. 52. In discussions, I often put forward unusual points of view. 76. In conversations, I often toy with some very wild ideas. 

> 17 Shang, et al.

Philosophicalness. 

10. I never enter into discussions about the future of the human race. (R) 34. I like to talk with others about the deeper aspects of our existence. 58. I never engage in so-called philosophical conversations. (R) 82. I regularly have discussions with people about the meaning of life. 

Inquisitiveness. 

16. During a conversation, I always try to find out about the background of somebody’s opinion. 40. I don’t bother asking a lot of questions just to find out why people feel the way they do about something. (R) 64. I ask a lot of questions to uncover someone’s motives. 88. I always ask how people arrive at their conclusions. 

Argumentativeness. 

22. To stimulate discussion, I sometimes express a view differ-ent from that of my conversation partner. 46. I like to provoke others by making bold statements. 70. I try to find out what people think about a topic by getting them to debate with me about it. 94. By making controversial statements, I often force people to express a clear opinion. 

## Dimension 5: Emotionality (E) 

Sentimentality. 

5. When I see others cry, I have difficulty holding back my tears. 29. During a conversation, I am not easily overcome by emo-tions. (R) 53. When describing my memories, I sometimes get visibly emotional. 77. People can tell that I am emotionally touched by some topics of conversation. 

Worrisomeness. 

11. When I’m worried about something, I find it hard to talk about anything else. 35. I tend to talk about my concerns a lot. 59. People can tell when I feel anxious. 83. When I worry, everybody notices. 

Tension. 

17. Because of stress, I am sometimes unable to express myself properly. 41. I can be visibly tense during a conversation. 65. I am able to address a large group of people very calmly. (R) 89. I find it hard to talk in a relaxed manner when what I have to say is valued highly. 

Defensiveness. 

23. The comments of others have a noticeable effect on me. 47. Nasty remarks from other people do not bother me too much. (R) 71. When people criticize me, I am visibly hurt. 95. I am not always able to cope easily with critical remarks. 

## Dimension 6: Impression Manipulativeness (IM) 

Ingratiation. 

6. I sometimes praise somebody at great length, without being really genuine, in order to make them like me. 30. In discussions I sometimes express an opinion I do not support in order to make a good impression. 54. Sometimes I use flattery to get someone in a favorable mood. 78. To be considered likeable, I sometimes say things my con-versation partner likes to hear. 

Charm. 

12. I sometimes use my charm to get something done. 36. I sometimes flirt a little bit to win somebody over. 60. I would not use my appearance to make people do things for me. (R) 84. I sometimes put on a very seductive voice when I want something. 

Concealingness. 

24. I sometimes conceal information to make me look better. 48. I sometimes "forget" to tell something when this is more convenient for me. 72. I tell people the whole story, even when this is probably not good for me. (R) 96. Even if I would benefit from withholding information from someone, I would find it hard to do so. (R) 

## Scoring Instructions 

(1) Reverse code all items marked with (R) using the formula: 1→5, 2 →4, 3 →3, 4 →2, 5 →1(2) Calculate facet scores by averaging the 4 items within each facet (3) Calculate dimension scores by averaging the facet scores within each dimension (4) Note: The original CSI had a fourth facet (Inscrutableness) under Impression Manipulativeness that was removed due to poor psychometric properties hence the highest number here is 96, but the total number of items is 92. 

## C Scenario templates used in study 

• S1: Weekly team check-in opening - Target dimension: Ex-pressiveness 

• S2: Explaining your work to interested colleague - Target dimension: Preciseness 

• S3: Colleague questions your approach - Target dimension: Verbal Aggressiveness 

• S4: New initiative announcement - Target dimension: Ques-tioningness 

• S5: Last-minute schedule change - Target dimension: Emo-tionality 

• S6: Informal catch-up with influential colleague - Target dimension: Impression Manipulativeness 

• S7: Sharing project update at standup - Target dimension: Expressiveness × Preciseness 

> 18 Mimetic Alignment with ASPECT: Evaluation of AI-inferred Personal Profiles

• S8: Unexpected process change notification - Target dimen-sion: Questioningness × Emotionality 

• S9: Credit attribution discussion - Target dimension: Verbal Aggressiveness × Impression Manipulativeness 

• S10: Team celebration planning - Target dimension: Emo-tionality × Expressiveness 

## D Data Collected 

Definition. We distinguish raw data (participant-generated or system-logged inputs as collected, after de-identification) from de-rived data (outputs produced by models or researchers). 

## D.1 Raw data from participants. 

(1) Psychometric self-report (CSI). 92 items across 6 dimen-sions/23 facets, Likert 1–5, plus optional free-text clarifica-tions ( 𝑁 =20 ; 1,840 item–person pairs). (2) Scenario evaluations. Within-subject triad comparisons for each scenario: rank-order (1st/2nd/3rd) and Likert ap-propriateness ratings for Profiled , Generic , and Self-Report 

responses (600 total evaluations), with optional short ratio-nales. (3) Video recordings of audit interactions. Think aloud rationales and decisions for per-facet review actions during auditing. 

## D.2 Derived data (model-produced). 

(1) LLM-inferred initial profiles. Item- and facet-level pre-dictions from the communication corpus mapped to CSI constructs. (2) Generated scenario responses. Model outputs for each condition (Profiled, Generic, Self-Report) per scenario tem-plate; canonicalized text with metadata. 

Note. All raw text was never sent to the researchers; derived arti-facts were produced by our pipeline installed on participants laptop during the study and sent to researchers after review. 

## E Figures 

> Received 26 March 2026
> 19

Shang, et al. 

Table 5: APRACE Attributes by Scenario 

Scenario Hierarchy Familiarity Purpose Mode Stakes Formality Timing Audience Emotional Motivation Desired State Outcome S1 Peer Close Info. Sharing Video Call Low Informal Routine Small Group Neutral Social Positive Res. S2 Peer Distant Info. Sharing Face-to-Face Low Informal Routine Private Neutral Achievement Neutral Comp. S3 Peer Close Decision Making Chat Medium Informal Routine Private Neutral Achievement Positive Res. S4 Manager Close Planning Face-to-Face Medium Formal Scheduled Small Group Confident Autonomy Neutral Comp. S5 Collaborator Distant Problem Solving Video Call Medium Formal Urgent Private Stressed Security Conflict Avoid. S6 Collaborator New Social Face-to-Face Low Informal Routine Private Neutral Social Positive Res. S7 Peer Close Info. Sharing Video Call Low Informal Routine Small Group Confident Achievement Positive Res. S8 Subordinate Close Info. Sharing Chat Medium Informal Routine Private Neutral Autonomy Neutral Comp. S9 Peer Distant Problem Solving Face-to-Face Medium Informal Scheduled Private Frustrated Achievement Positive Res. S10 Peer Close Social Face-to-Face Low Informal Routine Small Group Confident Social Positive Res. 

Figure 5: Distribution of occurrences of facets with no examples found in data across 20 participants. Each facet is assessed once, so the maximum number of occurrences would be 20 per facet. This is evident of what traits tend to be lack of behavioral evidence from workplace data. 

20