Title: From Trust to Appropriate Reliance: Measurement Constructs in Human-AI Decision-Making

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23896v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 01:17:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# From Trust to Appropriate Reliance: Measurement Constructs in Human-AI Decision-Making 

## MUHAMMAD RAEES, Rochester Institute of Technology, USA 

## KONSTANTINOS PAPANGELIS, Rochester Institute of Technology, USA 

While human-AI decision-making research has primarily used trust measurements to assess the practical usage of AI systems by their end-users, recent empirical evidence suggests that trust measurements do not inform users’ appropriate reliance on AI systems. While examining the human-AI decision-making literature, in this work, we review empirical studies that assess people’s appropriate reliance on AI advice, differentiating measurements and constructs of appropriate reliance from trust and mere reliance. Our analysis of literature shows that constructs for human-AI appropriate reliance are still fragmented in research. We present three views on appropriate reliance, namely Traditional, Appropriateness, and Dominance, as discussed in research. Using these views, we evaluate objective metrics reported in studies and argue for their consensus to facilitate the comparison across empirical research. We also discuss how studies employ objective metrics and examine their validity in application contexts. Our work contributes to the critical body of research on exploring objective metrics for assessing humans’ appropriate reliance on AI advice. Additional Key Words and Phrases: Human-AI Reliance, Appropriate Reliance, AI Reliance, Human-AI Decision Making 

1 Introduction 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems assist humans in their decision-making in diverse domains, including healthcare, education, and business [ 16 , 21 , 28 , 48 ]. However, concerns about AI’s transparency, accountability, and improper usage have also sparked criticism for its misuse and disuse [9, 43, 53]. To this end, research has explored various means (e.g., explanations [ 1 ], interaction [ 63 ]) to enhance transparency, accountability, and proper usage of AI systems; yet humans often over- or under-rely on AI, leading to inferior performance on decision-making tasks [ 4, 28 ]. To reduce over- or under-reliance on AI systems, humans should only rely on AI when it provides correct decision recommendations and not rely on it when it provides incorrect decision recommendations [ 73 ]. In research, this notion of reliance is often termed as “appropriate reliance” [73]. Building reliance on AI-assisted decision support is rooted in building trust on it [ 44 , 70 , 78 ]. Commonly, users’ trust in a system is measured as 1) subjective feedback (perceived trust), 2) behavioral assessment (demonstrated trust), and 3) a mix of both (actual/comprehensive trust) [ 54 , 92 ]. For instance, users’ trust can be measured as their perception of system performance and their inclination to rely on it [ 45 ]. “Appropriate trust” , however, is linked with aligning users’ perception with the actual system performance [ 54 , 94 ]. Users’ reliance on AI, on the other hand, is demonstrated and stems from humans’ tendency to adopt AI to achieve a task or make a decision [ 43 ]. Appropriate reliance is when humans only adopt AI when it provides correct advice or when they can objectively discriminate between the correct and incorrect AI advice [ 73 ]. Existing work [ 26 , 43 , 54 , 92 ] has explored the distinction between trust and reliance; however, confusion exists for evaluating human-AI reliance itself from appropriate reliance. In addition, no consensus exists for metrics for measuring appropriate reliance, which is used interchangeably with appropriate trust, which includes a degree of belief and personal feeling about the system alongside its actual performance [54]. In research, the metrics of measuring trust and reliance are studied [ 26 , 92 ]; still, understanding appropriate reliance and its measurements and constructs has been underexplored. Such under-exploration provides a fragmented understanding of human-AI appropriate reliance research. Hence, in this work, we focus on nascent constructs and metrics used for 

> Authors’ Contact Information: Muhammad Raees, mr2714@rit.edu, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York, USA; Konstantinos Papangelis, kxpigm@rit.edu, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, USA.

1

> arXiv:2604.23896v1 [cs.HC] 26 Apr 2026

2 Raees and Papangelis assessing humans’ appropriate reliance on AI advice, distinguishing them from metrics used for measuring mere AI reliance and trust. We investigate the challenges of accurate assessment of users’ objective performance for appropriate reliance on AI systems [ 26 , 43 , 73 ]. By doing so, we aim to provide a summary of constructs applied in the literature and discuss related research trends. We drive our investigation by exploring the following research questions; (1) How does current research define appropriate reliance and related concepts? (2) What and how are appropriate reliance constructs established, operationalized, and assessed in human-AI decision-making research? We attempt to answer these questions by conducting a review of recent empirical research on human-AI decision-making, studying appropriate reliance. We first clarify the distinction between trust and reliance, and their conceptu-alization, providing a synthesis of related work. Then, we examine the literature that studies human-AI appropriate reliance in human-AI decision-making settings. Our findings show that research aims to assess human-AI appropriate reliance using several metrics, i.e., by measuring relative reliance on one’s own abilities as well as on the AI system’s capabilities. Studies employ the objective of building reliance by capturing the correctness of AI advice as well as the complementary task performance. We also briefly provide summaries of study designs and how interventions are used to operationalize appropriate reliance constructs. Research increasingly highlights the need to gain an understanding of appropriate reliance on AI advice [ 9, 21 , 43 , 73 ]to improve human-AI decision-making scenarios. Still, to the best of our knowledge, limited work has evaluated the nascent field of exploring objective metrics used to study humans’ appropriate reliance in human-AI decision-making research. The main contributions our work makes are as follows: (1) An analysis of recent research (up to 2025) that studies human-AI appropriate reliance empirically. (2) An argument on the operationalization of metrics for measuring human-AI appropriate reliance in contrast to metrics for measuring mere reliance. (3) A synthesis of current gaps and recommendations for future work in human-AI appropriate reliance. 

2 Background and Related Work 

Trust is fundamental to determining humans’ willingness to adopt automated systems [ 36 ]. To understand trust, theoretical frameworks from psychology are used in various studies [ 3, 30 , 45 , 84 , 85 ]. The concept of trust has evolved over the years, from trust in automation (TiA) [ 36 , 45 ] to trust in AI-based systems [ 15 , 40 , 46 , 88 ]. By definition, trust is defined as an attitude that a system will help its users achieve in a situation characterized by uncertainty [ 45 ]. Commonly, trust can be evaluated as perceived, demonstrated, and actual trust [ 54 , 92 ]. The perceived trust is based on users’ perceptions or beliefs about systems [ 3, 36 , 45 ]. Perceived trust can give an inaccurate measure because the actual trustworthiness of the system may not be correctly perceived by the users [ 54 ]. The demonstrated trust accounts for the system’s functionality, i.e., how trustworthy a system is in achieving the required performance under specific situations. Actual trust or trustworthiness of the system is more complex, which needs to capture why and how people trust systems [ 74 ]. The actual trust may not be measured accurately, as it can be hindered by various factors (e.g., interfaces that do not present systems in their full capacity) [92]. 

2.1 From Trust to Reliance 

AI-assisted decision-making research operationalizes trust and reliance measures, where trust generally reflects the users’ subjective perception (i.e., affective or emotional attitude) towards others or systems [ 45 , 54 ], while reliance From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 3pertains to their (observable) objective behavior [ 25 , 36 , 70 ]. Trust captures a broader impression/demonstration of an AI system for its users while reliance covers a comprehensive case-by-case discrimination [ 71 , 72 ]. For example, reliance measurements facilitate understanding whether users adopt AI assistance by accepting or rejecting AI advice in their decision-making [ 73 ]. Reliance can also be related to demonstrated trust (i.e., adopting AI advice due to its trustworthiness), which signifies an evaluation of behavioral aspects, as used in measuring trust on AI [ 26 , 73 ]. The assessment of demonstrated trust can be viewed as a manifestation of user behavior (e.g., agreement or aversion with AI) [ 92 ]. Initial works [ 36 ] mostly studied users’ trust; however, trust measures do not necessarily enhance reliance [ 72 ], measurement of which has gained attention in recent work [26, 43]. Definitions of trust or reliance can be contested in terms of their usefulness to clearly differentiate humans’ abilities to rely on the AI advice [ 92 ]. For example, one might, without assessing AI advice appropriately, put a high trust in a system that aligns with them. In such cases, an increase in trust can lead to an increase in reliance (or vice versa) if the system is highly accurate, though it may or may not always be correct [ 45 , 72 ]. Oppositely, one might not trust a system highly but may have to rely on it [ 13 ]. Hence, such behavior of trust and reliance is not substantiated by the actual case-to-case performance of the system and the human [ 54 , 92 ]. For instance, capturing this behavior does not inform whether the reliance was formed due to an overlap of the human and the AI’s systems, i.e., when they agree with correct and incorrect AI suggestions or otherwise. Therefore, it is important to consider reliance separately as a behavioral construct to understand how humans adopt AI advice in their decision-making and whether such adoption is appropriate, i.e., correct reliance on AI advice [9, 86]. 

2.2 Human-AI Appropriate Reliance 

Understanding humans’ reliance behavior with AI requires evaluating case-to-case performance in decision-making scenarios. To understand such behavior, research explores an approach called Judge-Advisor-System (JAS) [ 79 ], where a human acts as judge and gets decision assistance from AI. For building reliance, this approach has to solve two main challenges: 1) the advice/advisor should be credible, and 2) humans should trust and then rely on the advice/advisor [ 43 ]. While addressing these challenges, users may be able to build reliance on AI, but it cannot necessarily always be appropriate, i.e., when AI provides incorrect advice presented as correct, and users accept this advice without being able to recognize it as incorrect [ 73 ]. Therefore, a more granular definition of appropriate reliance is defined [ 73 ] as “humans’ ability to discriminate correct and incorrect AI advice and to act upon that discrimination.” In addition, it is argued that users should neither over-rely nor under-rely on the AI advice [ 72 ]. Over-reliance is when users accept incorrect AI advice, and under-reliance is when users reject correct AI advice, failing to achieve complementary performance. Hence, the appropriate reliance entails that humans can differentiate between correct and incorrect AI recommendations, and prevent over-and under-reliance. In this work, we investigate how research measures users’ appropriate reliance, over-reliance, and under-reliance on AI advice. Assessing users’ over- or under-reliance may require an understanding of several underlying factors for measurement. For instance, users may over-rely on the system’s advice due to their belief in the system’s superiority [ 39 , 47 , 59 , 91 ], initiated by complacency or automation bias . Conversely, users may refrain from using the AI system due to performance bias , perceptions of self-efficacy (the ability to make decisions without advice), or purposefully considering the system’s advice as inferior, demonstrating algorithmic aversion [22 , 81 ]. For example, if a system has higher accuracy, users may rely on all the decisions it suggests and achieve higher performance or greater reliance on AI; however, this is not appropriate, as users are merely complying with the system. Such behavior may also lead to several biases, including automation bias [ 67 ], leading to inappropriate reliance on AI systems in decision-making. At the same time, if we only 4 Raees and Papangelis use the alignment with AI as a metric to estimate reliance, we can say users can (better) rely on the AI system. Still, it does not tell us about their behavior, for instance, when they were correct (or incorrect) and how AI advice influenced their behavior [73]. 

2.3 Related Research Reviews 

Several existing reviews have explored human-AI collaboration research [ 5, 26 , 43 , 54 , 62 , 67 , 92 ]. Bertrand et al. [ 5]analyzed how explanations affect decision-making, examining users’ cognitive biases and trust. Romeo et al. [ 67 ]reviewed research on “automation bias” influencing humans’ trust and reliance in human-AI collaboration, highlighting the impact of factors such as AI literacy, expertise, and explanations. Automation bias is a significant factor leading users to build trust in AI and align with AI advice [ 67 ]. Wischnewski et al. [ 92 ] evaluated studies on the calibration of trust in automated systems up to 2022. This work [ 92 ] analyzes calibration and metrics for trust in autonomous and robotic systems. In this work [ 92 ], the authors distinguish between the perspectives of measuring perceived and demonstrated trust on AI systems. In a similar context, Mehrotra et al. [ 54 ] surveyed research from 2012-2022, synthesizing several perspectives on forming trust with automation and AI systems. Their work examines historical perspectives on trust and explores existing disagreements over definitions and measures. In human-AI decision-making research, Lai et al. [ 43 ] analyzed empirical studies in human-AI complementarity, evaluating literature in human-AI decision-making up to 2021. Eckhardt et al. [ 26 ] surveyed human-AI reliance research by employing a socio-technical lens. Raees et al. [ 62 ] conducted an analytical review to understand how people rely on AI, analyzing the characteristics of people (i.e., participants) and tasks used in the experiments. Reviews [ 26 , 43 , 62 ]differentiate the objective metrics for reliance from the subjective trust, and critique the use of subjective metrics for measuring reliance. While these most up-to-date reviews highlight the needs and contexts for understanding trust and reliance, there is limited analysis of research that examines the metrics of human-AI appropriate reliance in detail. For instance, Eckhardt et al. [ 26 ] surveyed research, discussing constructs in human-AI reliance , considering literature up to 2023. While their survey [ 26 ] highlights the need to distinguish reliance from appropriate reliance, it contains limited work that particularly focuses on appropriate reliance. In addition, several studies exploring appropriate reliance have been published more recently. Hence, an in-depth synthesis and evaluation of the objective metrics used for assessing appropriate reliance is essential to form a consensus and inform future research, along with extending existing research [ 64 ]. Due to a recent growth in human-AI reliance studies [ 26 ], it is important to build upon the existing knowledge to augment the discussion on human-AI appropriate reliance in research. 

Our Contribution. Despite recent research emphasizing the need to differentiate subjective trust from objective reliance, limited work has focused on evaluating the relevant assessment methods used to study human-AI appropriate reliance [ 26 , 43 , 73 ]. The distinction between measurements and the constructs for reliance and appropriate reliance has been overlooked in recent work [ 26 , 43 ]. As research increasingly focuses on assessing users’ reliance on AI advice using objective metrics [ 9 , 73 ], it is important to analytically evaluate recent studies exploring appropriate reliance. In this work, we use a standardized method to analyze studies by specifically focusing on research in human-AI appropriate reliance and covering recent work. We distinguished between definitions of trust, reliance, and appropriate reliance, which we believe need to be explicit to advance the current research in this domain. Our work aims to add conceptual clarity on human-AI appropriate reliance research, evaluating different views and metrics for measurements. From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 5Identification  

> Articles identified from the
> database search
> SCOPUS (N = 369)
> ACM DL (N = 360)
> Screening for duplicates, article
> category (peer -reviewed, full),
> and availability
> N = 729
> Articles excluded
> N = 47
> Evaluation of the
> title and abstract
> N = 682
> Articles excluded
> N = 603
> Evaluation of full -text
> N = 79
> Articles excluded
> N = 57
> Eligible articles
> N = 22

Screening 

> Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria

Eligibility Inclusion 

> Search queries focused on under -
> reliance, over -reliance, and
> appropriate reliance

Fig. 1. The PRISMA [ 58 ] framework was used to assess research studies. The primary search was conducted on SCOPUS, with a secondary search on the ACM Digital Library (ACM DL). 

3 Methodology 

We followed a systematic protocol (i.e., the PRISMA [ 58 ] framework, as summarized in Figure 1) to identify and analyze literature, as adopted in prior studies [ 63 , 80 ]. First, we searched the ACM Digital Library (DL) with keywords on “human-AI reliance” and “human-AI decision-making”. We selectively skimmed through several articles matching the search terms. Based on the analysis of identified articles, we devised keywords ( “appropriate reliance”, “over-reliance”, “under-reliance” ) for a full search. Keywords were complemented with “artificial intelligence”, “machine learning”, and “human-AI decision-making” for focused context in searched databases. The search was initially conducted on the SCOPUS database in mid-2025. Our initial analysis of SCOPUS results showed the prevalence of the topic studied at ACM venues, particularly within human-AI research. Hence, we conducted another search on the ACM DL in December 2025. In both full searches, the lower bound was set to 2018 to limit the results and focus on recent studies exploring the nascent topic of human-AI appropriate reliance. In total, we collected 729 search results across the queried databases. As we focused on evaluating the empirical studies of human-AI appropriate reliance, we applied the following inclusion and exclusion criteria as a funnel. (1) Peer-Reviewed: We only included full conference and journal papers. Short and workshop papers, books/chap-ters, and non-reviewed work (e.g., from arXiv) were excluded. In addition, secondary studies such as surveys and literature reviews were also excluded. (2) Human-AI Decision-Making: From the remaining articles, we screened for studies with human subjects and human-AI decision-making contexts. We used title and abstract screening to remove articles without human subjects, decision-making context, and those that only explored theoretical aspects. (3) Human-AI Appropriate Reliance Measurement with Objective Metrics: We performed a full-text screen-ing on the remaining articles, removing articles that did not evaluate 1) human-subject studies using quantitative methods, and 2) objective metrics to measure appropriate reliance (including over- and under-reliance). We applied the above-mentioned criteria sequentially and discussed for consensus among ourselves. After applying the criteria, we selected 22 papers that employed objective metrics of appropriate reliance as per the evaluation. Some studies also included subjective measures along with objective metrics, and those were not excluded. Several studies were excluded due to their focus only on metrics that did not capture appropriate reliance through objective metrics, i.e., only measuring reliance on AI using metrics like accuracy, agreements with AI, or switching decisions due to AI. In another iteration, we looked at the relevant references of included studies to identify more papers using snowballing [ 93 ](by reviewing their titles and abstracts); however, no new results matching the criteria were found. The first author 6 Raees and Papangelis 

> Table 1. Main dimensions for the analysis with three main views discussed in the literature to study appropriate reliance. The analysis also includes other dimensions, such as metrics, measurement protocols, and experimental design details.

Dimensions Categories Sub-Categories (# Studies) Explanation Reliance Views Traditional - (10) §4.1 explores human-AI reliance views discussed in literature, differentiating from measures of trust. Appropriateness - (10) Dominance - (2) Measuring Reliance on AI Metrics Objective Metrics (22) §4.2 examines objective and subjective metrics re-ported in the literature, along with their usage, in concurrent or multi-step decision-making protocols. Subjective Metrics (20) Measurement Protocol Concurrent (4) Sequential (20) Intervention Impact Appropriate Reliance Positive (7) §4.3 explores the impact of common interventions on achieving appropriate reliance. Negative (5) No (Explicit) Effect (6) Experimental Design Domains Education/Learning (7) §4.4 explores the contexts of applications (e.g., do-main areas, implementation details), and participant expertise (e.g., background, domain knowledge), and the level of AI implementation (realism, complexity, models, etc.). Business/Work-Context (7) Leisure/Sports/Arts (5) Participant Expertise Domain/AI Users (2) Novices (20) AI Fidelity Actual (15) Simulated (7)  

> ∗

Sub-categories (studies) are often non-exclusive. 

coded the papers across dimensions of evaluation metrics, experimental designs, and intervention methods used in studies. Afterwards, codes were collated to create groups and themes to report analysis and discussions. The selection of studies comes from top venues 1 i.e., CHI, IUI, PACMHCI, and others. Most selected studies were published between 2023 and 2025, showing the recent conceptualization of appropriate reliance. The review protocol and coding are provided as an anonymized Open Science Framework (OSF) repository [2] for the reader’s evaluation. 

4 Analysis 

In what follows, we provide our analysis, as coded in Table 1. Section 4.1 examines the different views of reliance. We analyze the metrics (objective and subjective) and measurements used in studies in Section 4.2. Section 4.3 discusses studies’ intervention methods. Finally, a concise analysis of the studies’ experimental design elements is presented in Section 4.4. The Appendices (Tables 4 – 7) provide summaries of evaluated research. 

4.1 Reliance Views and Concepts 

Understanding appropriate reliance on AI systems as a research field has started growing recently, with various calls to differentiate it from understanding appropriate trust [ 9 , 73 , 86 ]. Hence, we first examine how appropriate reliance is conceptualized in research among different views. 

> 1CHI: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. IUI: Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. PACMHCI: Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction.

From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 7In human-AI decision support, research has conceptualized the need to differentiate appropriate reliance as a behavioral construct and clearly examine its operationalization as distinctively as possible from the appropriate trust [ 26 , 54 , 73 ]. Still, the conceptualization of appropriate reliance as a construct is in nascent stages and is often considered a mere adoption of AI advice. Hence, our first aim is to clarify the understanding of the different concepts surrounding appropriate reliance. In research, “Appropriate reliance” is defined as a behavioral aspect with three patterns/views [ 10 , 72 ] as Traditional, Appropriateness, and Dominance , which are expressed in Table 2. In all views, it is expected that the human decision-maker gets advice from AI and stays in control and is responsible for making the final decision as opposed to giving control to the AI system for final execution [92]. The traditional view [86 ] assesses users’ overall behavior (performance) with decision support for measuring over-reliance or under-reliance on AI. For instance, it captures the reliance behavior, arguing that users should follow correct AI recommendations and should not follow incorrect AI recommendations. If users follow incorrect AI advice, they exhibit an over-reliance behavior, and if users do not follow correct advice, they show under-reliance behavior. This view is commonly studied without explicit definitions, as it mainly originates from concepts of demonstrated (or appropriate) trust, measured through users’ objective behavior. Around 10 (45%) studies in our corpus apply the traditional view for capturing users’ reliance on AI advice, mostly being applied in earlier research studies. This view focuses on the alignment between the perceived and actual performance of the system [ 54 , 92 ]. The alignment is considered holistically instead of evaluating users’ ability to differentiate decision-making outcomes, and measurements mainly focus on the accuracy of final decisions, i.e., adopting correct AI advice and rejecting incorrect AI advice. Though this view has objective metrics for over- and under-reliance, it does not fully drill down on the behavior users depict during the assessment [ 7, 86 , 94 ]. For instance, this view does not account for whether users were able to identify errors in AI advice or in their own judgment and then make corrections to their decisions. Schemmer et al. [ 73 ] define the appropriateness view as attempting to understand the users’ relative self-reliance (RSR) and relative AI reliance (RAIR). Relative self-reliance is a metric that describes the situation in which humans correctly reject wrong AI advice and make the correct decision independently, i.e., without being influenced by the AI’s wrong recommendation. Relative AI reliance captures the user’s shift to a correct AI advice, i.e., the situation in which the user initially makes an incorrect decision but subsequently changes it to align with the correct AI recommendation. These metrics capture the user’s ability to rely on the AI advice during decision-making more appropriately [ 26 ]. For instance, in cases where users’ decisions are different than systems’ decisions (incorrect/correct), it becomes important to assess whether users can discriminate between such advice, i.e., can they contradict and make correct decisions using self or relative reliance. Schemmer et al. [ 73 ] argue that the metrics in the traditional view can have a major disadvantage of not knowing whether the reliance on AI advice stems from a correct discrimination of the AI decisions by humans or simply by an overlap of human and AI decisions. As this view was introduced in 2023 [ 73 ], 10 recent studies (45%) apply it for measuring users’ reliance on AI advice. Another important but slightly less applied view is defined by Cabitza et al. [ 9], called the dominance view . The dominance view captures the dominance that technology exerts on users, which can be detrimental or beneficial in overall decision-making [ 81 ]. This view aims to capture how exertion by technology (AI) can influence users’ appropriate reliance and is often studied in high-stakes domains to understand the beneficial and detrimental effects of using AI advice, as well as biases induced by the way AI advice is presented. The dominating influence of AI can make users take a more subservient role (leading to confirmation bias or automation complacency), and defer their decision-making to the technology (AI). When the influence of the technology is positive, i.e., such that the AI helps users avoid mistakes or make better decisions they would have made without getting AI advice, it will positively improve the overall (beneficial) 8 Raees and Papangelis                                           

> Table 2. Views exploring trust and reliance in research. The Judge-Advisor System (JAS) pattern makes users decide before and after AI assistance. 1: correct advice/decision or 0: incorrect advice/decision w.r.t. the ground truth. In AI-assisted decision-making, measuring appropriate reliance has become an important challenge.
> Human Decision AI Advice Final Decision Traditional View [86] Appropriateness View [73] Dominance View [9] 000Over-Reliance N/A Detrimental Reliance 001Appropriate Reliance N/A Beneficial Under-Reliance 010Under-Reliance Incorrect Self-Reliance Detrimental Self-Reliance 011Appropriate Reliance Correct AI Reliance Beneficial Over-reliance 100Over-Reliance Incorrect AI Reliance Detrimental Over-Reliance 101Appropriate Reliance Correct Self-Reliance Beneficial Self-Reliance 110Under-Reliance N/A Detrimental Under-Reliance 111Appropriate Reliance N/A Beneficial Reliance

reliance on the AI advice. However, the dominance can also negatively mislead users to make more mistakes, or over-rely on the technology (AI) [9], resulting in detrimental reliance. Extensions of the discussed views are also explored, for instance, Morrison et al. [ 57 ] expand the appropriateness view from Schemmer et al. [ 73 ], including the dimension of incorrect explanations, i.e., where AI predictions can be correct, but their explanations can be incorrect or vice versa. The concept of imperfect explanations [ 57 ] can exist regardless of the correctness of AI systems. For instance, explanations of AI systems may oversimplify or incorrectly portray the underlying decisions, leading to under- or over-reliance on the AI advice. Besides, explanations of AI systems are only one of the many components that impact reliance measurement, as explained in the following sections. Some studies also use other constructs that may partially conform with appropriate reliance, such as user agreeableness, or switching decisions with AI advice [7, 8], considering the correctness of final decisions. 

Key insights. The literature mainly explores three main views to assess users’ appropriate reliance on AI advice. The traditional view uses over-reliance and under-reliance measures based on overall behavioral patterns. The 

appropriateness view uses relative AI reliance (RAIR) and relative self-reliance (RSR) to measure users’ independent and AI-dependent decisions. The dominance view measures the benevolent or detrimental exertion of technology for final decisions. Studies have also used extensions of these views to understand users’ appropriate reliance on AI advice, but the research on consensus and validity of these views across domains remains limited. Defining clarity on measuring appropriate reliance is highly important, as highlighted in related studies of appropriateness and dominance [9, 73]. 

4.2 Metrics and Measurements 

Here, we evaluate the metrics and measurements that studies have employed. Figure 2 shows the prevalence of both objective and subjective metrics reported in studies. 

4.2.1 Reliance Metrics. Studies use several metrics to measure users’ adoption of AI advice to assess their reliance on AI. In selected studies, decision accuracy [ 11 ] is a commonly used (16 studies) metric that measures the correctness of final decisions. However, it does not directly distinguish whether reliance was appropriate at a granular level, and only evaluates whether the final decision is correct or not. While studies also employ other metrics that aim to capture users’ behavior, they do not directly report to assess their appropriate reliance. For instance, agreement fraction (8 From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 9A) Objective measures reported in selected studies B) Subjective measures reported in selected studies (Min 2)                  

> Objective Measure
> 0246810 12 14 16
> Times Reported
> Accuracy
> Over-reliance
> RAIR
> RSR
> Under-reliance
> Switch Fraction
> Agreement Fraction
> Accuracy-wid
> AI-effect on Accuracy
> Weight of Advice
> Subjective Measure
> 0123456789
> Times Reported
> Confidence Rating
> Trust in Automation
> Affinity for Technology
> Usefulness/helpfulness
> Understanding
> Subjective Trust Rating
> Preference
> Complexity
> Appropriateness

Fig. 2. Left : The prevalence of objective metrics reported in selected studies. Accuracy is the most widely used measure. Common metrics for appropriate reliance used are over-reliance, under-reliance, RAIR, RST, and Accuracy-Wid. Studies also measure users’ reliance on AI through agreements or switches. Right : The prevalence of subjective metrics reported in selected studies. Studies commonly use confidence, trust, usefulness, and understanding ratings to measure subjective experiences. Some studies also capture users’ complexity, preferences, and appropriateness to understand experiences better. 

studies) [ 34 ] and switch fraction (8 studies) [ 31 ] are often used together to see how users agree or shift their decisions with AI, respectively. Agreement fraction measures how frequently (or what percentage of decisions) users agree with AI advice, and switch fraction measures how frequently (or what percentage of decisions) users change their initial decision after seeing the AI advice. Neither of these metrics, however, captures whether the reliance was appropriate, i.e., the correctness of user decisions in cases when AI advice was correct or incorrect. Along with accuracy, around 5 studies also measure AI’s effect on accuracy [ 7 ] as a means to test if providing AI advice (against no advice) can improve users’ reliance. 

4.2.2 Appropriate Reliance Metrics. Existing reviews [ 26 , 43 ] evaluated metrics for overall reliance and have overlooked their distinction from metrics needed for capturing appropriate reliance explicitly. Recent studies explore the metrics for capturing appropriate reliance by applying traditional metrics like over-reliance [7] (13 studies) and under-reliance [ 11 ] (8 studies) as separate metrics, which capture when users blindly agree with incorrect advice and neglect correct advice, respectively. In terms of metrics aligned with the appropriateness [ 73 ] view, studies also use relative AI reliance (RAIR) (10 studies) and relative self-reliance (RSR) (9 studies), as defined in Section 4.1. Likewise, Accuracy-wid [ 33 ] (accuracy with initial disagreement – 5 studies) is used to capture users’ appropriate reliance when they disagree with the AI advice initially. Cabitza et al. [ 9] also use weight of advice (WOA) as a collective metric to measure if the users change their decision due to AI’s assistance or exertion towards a correct decision. Still, most studies rely on fixed reliance metrics (i.e., for each interaction), and user reliance development over time is under-explored [ 83 ]. The definitions of the above-mentioned metrics, along with others, are provided in Appendix A. 

4.2.3 Measurement and Evaluation. The point at which AI advice is given, i.e., using a concurrent or sequential (multi-step) protocol, also affects the choice of metrics as both protocols slightly differ in the way they use reliance metrics [ 72 ]. For instance, concurrent approaches lack switching or a change of decision after taking the advice, hence, measuring fewer objective metrics. Therefore, 90% of the studies (20) in our corpus mainly use a two-step (or multi-step) process where humans first make the decisions, investigating the task themselves, and then are provided with the AI advice, subsequently having the option to revise their decision. Though not very common, around around 18% of the studies (4 studies), often as part of multi-study experiments, use concurrent process. The use of two-stage decision-making has become a standard in recent studies, as an initial human decision is essential to capture for the employed metrics for capturing appropriate reliance. Some cases include reliance development over multi-stage decisions, where users 10 Raees and Papangelis explore additional information in intermediary steps before making decisions. Around 90% (20) of the studies in our corpus rely on assessing and reporting user interaction on these metrics using empirical analysis , while a few (2 studies) use mixed methods , showing the growing prevalence of objective measurements compared to evaluations reported in existing reviews [26, 43]. 

4.2.4 Subjective Metrics. Studies often supplement the objective metrics of human reliance on AI with various sub-jective metrics , aiming at capturing user perceptions towards AI. Commonly used subjective metrics include the users’ confidence [ 94 ] in their decisions (8 studies), Trust in Automation [ 31 ] (5 studies) or perceived trust [ 34 ] (4 studies), mental demand [ 7] (5 studies), usefulness [50 ] (4 studies), understanding [14 ] of advice (4 studies), and others [ 12 , 52 , 83 ]. Subjective metrics focus on measuring the perceived usefulness and understanding of AI advice to capture users’ experiences with the system. These metrics are mostly self-assessed attributes and are also used to understand the impact on user performance, but they do not necessarily help measure actual reliance behavior. Survey feedback is also used to provide deeper insights about human behavior in reliance strategies. A summary of the objective and subjective metrics used by the examined literature is provided in Table 4 (Appendix). Due to the variance in using metrics to measure users’ performance, there is still limited consensus on common measurements of humans’ appropriate reliance on AI across the studies. The combination of objective and subjective metrics does not necessarily lead to better predictions of reliance; for instance, users can express high trust towards a system that aligns with them, without any objective indication of appropriate reliance. 

Key insights. The literature reports the use of a variety of objective and subjective metrics to evaluate the users’ reliance and appropriate reliance, as well as their perceptions towards AI. In terms of objective metrics , we find that over-reliance, RAIR, RSR, and under-reliance are commonly used as appropriate reliance metrics. Other metrics, such as switch fractions and agreement fractions, are used, but for capturing user behavior without the focus on appropriate reliance. The accuracy metric is used in both cases. In terms of subjective metrics , we find several metrics that only measure perception or feedback, for instance, to capture trust and confidence for gauging the users’ perception of AI systems. However, subjective impressions (such as trust and confidence) do not necessarily reveal whether users can build an appropriate reliance on AI. 

4.3 Interventions for Human-AI Reliance 

Here, we summarize the most commonly applied interventions and their impact on achieving appropriate reliance. Overall, studies show mixed results regarding the improvement of reliance on AI (see Table 3), and cite limitations in forming appropriate human-AI reliance. 

4.3.1 Engagement and Effort. Studies have used several interventions (e.g., cognitive forcing [ 7 ] or frictional AI [ 9 ]) with metrics to capture users’ over-reliance. Metrics also measure how users engage with AI systems [ 7 , 83 ] to capture whether they can appropriately assess the AI advice or not. For instance, if users can analytically engage with AI advice and spend time understanding it, they may be able to reduce their over- or under-reliance on AI [ 86 ]. Explanations of AI systems help users in understanding AI advice, but they have often been reported to cause over-reliance [ 7, 83 ]. In practice, people weigh the potential benefits of cognitive effort against its perceived cost [ 42 ], a phenomenon also referred to as cognitive-effort-discounting [ 90 ]. For example, people are less likely to over-rely on the AI system’s advice when the benefit of obtaining the correct answer substantially outweighs the risk of over-reliance (e.g., avoiding sending From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 11 

> Table 3. Common interventions and their influence on achieving appropriate reliance under the experimental conditions. Positive influence means that the respective methods were found useful in improving users’ behavior for appropriate reliance.

Interventions Influence Cognitive Forcing [7], Deductive-XAI [11], Second Opinion [14, 49], Cognitive Effort [86] Positive Task Difficulty [69, 86], Poor Impression [32], Self Assessment [34], Domain Knowledge [57] Negative Example-based XAI [7, 12, 72], Feature-based XAI [12, 75], Showing AI Uncertainty [52] No Effect an unprofessional email to a boss), compared with situations in which the benefit-risk tradeoff is low (e.g., assessing the sentiment of a tweet) [ 86 ]. Hence, people’s reliance on the AI is also impacted by the value of the decision and the effort it takes to make correct decisions [69], which needs to be measured. 

4.3.2 Task Complexity. Task difficulty is often not considered in measuring humans’ appropriate reliance on AI advice [ 68 ]; however, it can significantly impact user behavior with AI. Hence, the same metrics may not be applicable if the tasks have different complexity and users’ stakes. For instance, task complexity increases information overload pertaining to the user’s perception and capabilities [ 61 ], which also should be taken into account for measuring reliance. Some tasks can be assigned to rely on AI advice easily (easy or low-stakes), while others may require more consideration [82, 83]. Therefore, considering the task complexity for measuring appropriate reliance is an important area of research to explore [ 68 ]. For instance, when users lack expertise in a task, they tend to (inappropriately) rely more heavily on AI advice, especially as the task becomes more complex [ 19 , 69 ]. Comparing whether existing metrics produce similar results in different task settings for a similar population can inform their validity for measuring appropriate reliance across settings [ 68 ]. Research suggests that when the task is difficult, the design should help users make better decisions through reflections [ 38 , 77 ]. Hence, assessing or measuring whether users reflect in their decision-making can provide more insights into their reliance behavior [7]. 

4.3.3 User Expertise. Users’ expertise or skills with AI systems are also an important factor to measure [ 8 ], which is mostly captured as fixed subjective self-reports. Buçinca et al. [ 8] highlighted that measuring users’ competence and skill can also inform reliance behavior, as AI support often fails to address the knowledge gaps that users seek to fill [ 8]. They [ 8] showed that enhancing users’ skills with AI systems is important for improving engagement and human decision-making. Similarly, measuring users’ interaction with partial explanations can also be useful [ 49 , 50 ]. Partial explanations align with a larger body of research on deliberation that encourages users to reflect on their decisions [ 50 ]. Morrison et al. [ 57 ] explored the metrics for capturing whether users can differentiate between correct and incorrect explanations of AI systems. Lu et al. [ 49 ] pointed out that active solicitation can also influence reliance, for instance, by getting a second opinion to form a consensus. Different people trust AI differently [ 83 ], and capturing their traits and real-time behavior can help define metrics that can be applied to study personality factors in human-AI appropriate reliance. Capturing other demographics (e.g., education, literacy) [ 34 ], and more importantly, domain expertise are central to defining and evaluating accurate metrics for human-AI appropriate reliance. 12 Raees and Papangelis 

Key insights. Certain methods, such as cognitive forcing and deliberation, show positive effects in building appropriate reliance. However, their operationalization in tasks is seldom measured in practice. In particular, assessing users’ expertise (i.e., an estimation of their skills) and the difficulty of the task are important. However, studies often do not relate user behavioral patterns (engagement, skills, expertise) and task complexity (easy to hard) with metrics used to capture appropriate reliance. Studies also indicate that several applied interventions have either a negative or, at best, a neutral effect on appropriate reliance. 

4.4 Experimental Design 

We also examine the experimental design of human-AI reliance studies. Studies have employed various applications in various high- and low-stakes domains, as depicted in (Table 5). 

4.4.1 Study Participants. Studies show the application of diverse tasks, but most (20 out of 22) of them use lay users or crowd workers as the study subjects performing the tasks. Such reliance on lay users and crowd-workers limits actual evaluations of AI systems with relevant stakeholders. Studies recruit on average approximately 309 people (mean = 309.18, std = 273.93 ). Around 50% (11) of the examined studies acknowledge the limitations of recruiting laypeople and using tasks that are not relevant to their expertise or stakes. While evaluations with crowd workers are appealing when assessing target users, they only capture the general notion of human-AI decision-making [ 23 ]. Therefore, it may be possible that measurements in such experimental settings may not be realistic representations of actual context-specific scenarios. Many studies (45%) did not use tasks that were relevant to the users’ expertise. It can also be argued that measurements may miss capturing users’ reliance if they provide low-effort results [ 31 ]. Despite ensuring crowd workers can execute tasks [ 23 ], it is also useful to employ reliance measurements with domain users for decision-making tasks. Existing work [ 24 , 65 ] also highlights that running complex tasks with crowd workers may not be entirely representative and therefore may not report actual measurement of appropriate reliance on AI advice. Hence, further work is required to understand the assessment of metrics for tasks that are properly representative of decision-making scenarios explored in studies for comparative evaluations across contexts. 

4.4.2 Systems. The systems or situations in which study experiments are conducted may also influence the metrics and results for human reliance on AI. Studies examine human decision-making using a mix of AI models (Table 6). However, around 7 studies (33%) do not construct real AI interventions, and, instead, use simulated [ 18 ] approaches, trying to replicate what users would believe or experience while interacting with AI-assisted decision support. Although this is a well-accepted strategy to evaluate systems in research, non-realistic AI systems risk fully replicating a realistic AI and human behavior [ 83 ]. The literature acknowledges that evaluating AI systems in their actual form through human subject experiments that involve realistic tasks can be important to assess reliance [ 23 ]. Hence, using fictitious or non-representative tasks, especially when performed with crowd workers in low-stakes or irrelevant contexts (about the task at hand), may not represent real-world situations. Therefore, for an accurate assessment of metrics, the system implementations should also be uniform across studies. From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 13 

Key insights. Studies have measured humans’ appropriate reliance on AI in various application domains. However, the majority of the studies employed novice participants, and task scenarios may not be comparable across studies, thereby limiting the generality of the used metrics. The lack of uniform evaluations may considerably undermine the applicability of results from studies across tasks and participants’ expertise. Many studies do not employ real AI systems; rather, they rely on simulated approaches, which further limit their operationalization and appropriate assessment across contexts. 

5 Discussion 

Current research in human-AI decision-making focuses on assessing users’ trust and reliance on AI systems through diverse metrics. While existing work has focused on evaluating calibrated or appropriate trust using different metrics [ 54 ,92 ], less research work has focused on measuring users’ appropriate reliance on AI. Our analysis shows that there is a nascent but growing interest in empirical research to evaluate users’ appropriate reliance on AI using objective metrics. As highlighted in recent literature [ 9, 26 ], there is a need for evaluations of metrics for measuring trust and reliance distinctively. For instance, by clarifying the constructs for reliance, metrics should aim to assess users’ performance for case-to-case interactions and behavior, e.g., on being able to adopt AI advice to achieve a task. We further argue that metrics for reliance and appropriate reliance also have a fine distinction, which needs to be more explicit in measurements and related constructs. Measuring objective performance on being able to discriminate correct/incorrect AI advice provides a realistic notion of users’ appropriate reliance on AI advice, compared to using a mix of objective and subjective metrics [ 92 ]. However, our analysis shows that the field is yet to settle on metrics to measure users’ appropriate reliance on AI [9, 43], which is often mixed with measuring mere reliance [26]. Investigating users’ actual behavior with AI systems instead of only capturing their trust or agreement with AI is essential to test systems’ appropriate use in realistic contexts. Our work conceptualizes and provides the current state of research on metrics for assessing appropriate reliance, highlighting the discord with measuring trust and reliance. Our analysis also distinguishes appropriateness of reliance from mere reliance as a conceptual framework. Conceptually, it is important to distinguish between metrics for appropriate reliance, such as over-reliance, under-reliance, and relative reliance, from the existing metrics of accuracy, agreement, or switching, among others [ 26 , 43 ]. Such a distinction will help clarify the need for more refined and standardized metrics for appropriate, over-, and under-reliance, as well as consolidate the research agenda in this domain. This consolidation can ensure that future empirical studies use standardized and validated metrics for measurement. 

5.1 Potential Research Gaps 

In what follows, we briefly reflect on potential gaps and challenges we identified through our analysis of current human-AI appropriate reliance research. 

• Varying task complexity and users’ expertise can elicit different reliance behavior, which needs to be measured across domains to validate metrics [ 68 ]. Hence, studies show limitations in generalizing results across domains, as most metrics are not standardized [ 76 ]. In addition, intervention-specific behaviors are often under-substantiated. For example, studies introduce methods to enhance user engagement, deliberation, and other capacities to assess AI systems; however, they barely measure how users engage with such interventions. 

• Experiments with non-realistic tasks and a lack of users’ expertise on those tasks may fail to assess users’ reliance appropriately [ 27 , 87 ]. Optimal measurements may come from studies that apply metrics in realistic 14 Raees and Papangelis evaluations instead of one-off experiments with crowd workers and proxy tasks [ 23 ]. Metrics may exhibit different outcomes when applied in domain-specific settings. 

• Metrics to assess reliance and appropriate reliance have been mostly studied in classification-related scenarios where outputs have fixed ground truth and are considered binary (accept or reject AI advice). Other AI types may have different assumptions. For instance, generative AI outputs often do not have a fixed ground truth and may require different metrics, which are highly underexplored in research [37]. 

• Subjective metrics may only test users’ perception of AI systems and do not validate their reliance. Their use reflects a lack of a common framework for selecting metrics using a standardized method [26]. 

• Broadly, studies focused on over-reliance and somewhat overlook the aspect of under-reliance, i.e., when users do not use the AI advice [ 82 , 83 ]. Hence, equal consideration of both constructs is important for providing insights from both perspectives (over- and under-reliance) in the user studies. 

• Research uses metrics that measure users’ reliance on one-off interactions [ 34 , 72 ]. Capturing users’ reliance in scenarios where system performance and users’ reliance change over time is less explored [ 76 , 89 ]. For instance, users’ reliance may change while interacting with an AI system after a few iterations. Therefore, further research on such factors could provide empirical insights about progressive reliance on AI advice. 

• Human-AI reliance research has under-explored the users’ ability to manipulate, contest, or change the AI assistance, which can be an important factor in measuring their reliance [ 63 ]. Real AI systems may have the flexibility to adapt AI advice [ 24 ], and investigating reliance in setups where AI systems can be manipulated can induce more insights and elicit additional metrics for measurement. 

5.2 Recommendations for Further Studies 

Current research on human-AI reliance has several open questions that researchers can further explore. 

• Establishing definitions and terminologies for appropriate reliance is integral. We discussed three views explored in research: traditional [ 86 ], appropriateness [73 ], and dominance [9 ]. Although these views focus on objective metrics for measuring appropriate reliance on AI, there is a need to unify them as frameworks. Such frameworks could be identified based on the goal or utility of AI interventions. One such framework could unify the assessment of patterns when initial human decisions and AI advice differ in correctness. In practice, studies still use fragmented concepts and metrics of appropriate reliance. Standardizing the use of metrics for measuring appropriate reliance, as well as introducing extended metrics, is recommended [56]. 

• Over-reliance on AI can also lead users to lose their skills in the tasks, which should also be assessed by incorporating metrics for users’ deskilling [ 8] and agency loss [ 63 ], which are rarely used in studies. Assessing appropriate reliance is also important in situations where users are given the agency to contest and adjust an AI advice [22]. Further research can explore metrics for appropriate reliance in such settings. 

• Metrics for appropriate reliance can also be aligned to measure user engagement with AI [ 17 , 55 ]. Engaging users with AI can help them contest, take ownership of their decisions, and establish critical engagement or mindful usage [ 35 ]. Measuring how users take ownership of decisions while building appropriate reliance can inform more about their ability to evaluate AI. 

• Research also needs to explore metrics for appropriate reliance with generative AI [ 20 , 41 ], as the mode of adopting AI advice transitions from binary to open choice [ 37 ]. Such outputs can have varying levels of correctness and value for different user groups, providing several opportunities for future research to explore. From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 15 

• Assessing users’ domain expertise and self-confidence about the task is essential for eliciting a realistic behav-ior [51]. For instance, measurements can enable capturing users’ reliance on AI with superior performance to themselves, and self-reliance when AI underperforms [ 52 ]. However, due to over-reliance, users may not be able to assess the system’s incorrect advice when the system underperforms. Reliance on AI may also depend on situational/contextual factors , cognitive traits , or individuality [20, 82, 83] for more realistic evaluations. 

• Understanding and modeling why inappropriate reliance happens (i.e., due to poor self-assessment, literacy, bias, or task stakes) can inform more realistic assessment metrics for appropriate reliance [ 29 ]. Such understanding can inform intervention design to facilitate and measure appropriate reliance effectively. 

5.3 Limitations 

We focused on research in human-AI appropriate reliance measurement, where the vast majority of studies have previously explored measuring trust. This focus may have resulted in eliminating studies that use appropriate trust interchangeably with appropriate reliance. Our search was conducted using SCOPUS and the ACM Digital Library, similar to reviews in related domains [ 43 , 92 ]. While our search was comprehensive, some work on human-AI reliance may exist outside the covered databases. Though we searched on other engines (i.e., IEEE eXplore and Google Scholar), the results found beyond what were already in the dataset lacked exploring appropriate reliance constructs and objective metrics, and thus were not reported/included. Still, other specific libraries (e.g., AIS) can be explored to enhance search results. In addition, despite careful evaluation, we acknowledge that results may be affected by screening bias and subjective interpretation during the application of inclusion and exclusion criteria. 

6 Conclusion 

We examined the recent literature on human-AI decision-making with a particular focus on research on humans’ appropriate reliance on AI advice. We first highlighted the distinction between metrics for measuring appropriate trust, reliance, and appropriate reliance. Building upon the definitions, our analysis showed that there are three common views in research for conceptualizing reliance, namely, traditional, appropriateness, and dominance. We found that there are clear gaps in the constructs explored in the literature, as well as in measurements used in application contexts. We discussed several open-ended research gaps and potential directions for future research to better understand and explore constructs for human-AI appropriate reliance. We provide our study corpus, coding, and analysis as an anonymized but public resource [2] for future work to expand upon. 

7 Generative AI Usage Statement 

No generative AI tools were used in the writing, editing, or preparation of this manuscript. All content was produced by the authors. 

References            

> [1] Sajid Ali, Tamer Abuhmed, Shaker El-Sappagh, Khan Muhammad, Jose M. Alonso-Moral, Roberto Confalonieri, Riccardo Guidotti, Javier Del Ser, Natalia Díaz-Rodríguez, and Francisco Herrera. 2023. Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI): What we know and what is left to attain Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence. Information Fusion 99 (2023), 101805. doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2023.101805 [2] OSF Anonymous. 2026. Anonymized Material for Study: Review Protocol, Data Analysis, and Detailed Descriptions .https://osf.io/nxph2/overview? view_only=2467fe0607724f2bbf4d9ca9c36e86f0 [3] Annette Baier. 1986. Trust and antitrust. ethics 96, 2 (1986), 231–260. [4] Gagan Bansal, Tongshuang Wu, Joyce Zhou, Raymond Fok, Besmira Nushi, Ece Kamar, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Daniel Weld. 2021. Does the Whole Exceed its Parts? The Effect of AI Explanations on Complementary Team Performance. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human

16 Raees and Papangelis 

Factors in Computing Systems (Yokohama, Japan) (CHI ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 81, 16 pages. doi:10.1145/3411764.3445717 [5] Astrid Bertrand, Rafik Belloum, James R. Eagan, and Winston Maxwell. 2022. How Cognitive Biases Affect XAI-assisted Decision-making: A Systematic Review. In Proceedings of the 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (Oxford, United Kingdom) (AIES ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 78–91. doi:10.1145/3514094.3534164 [6] Michelle Brachman, Zahra Ashktorab, Michael Desmond, Evelyn Duesterwald, Casey Dugan, Narendra Nath Joshi, Qian Pan, and Aabhas Sharma. 2022. Reliance and Automation for Human-AI Collaborative Data Labeling Conflict Resolution. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 6, CSCW2, Article 321 (Nov. 2022), 27 pages. doi:10.1145/3555212 [7] Zana Buçinca, Maja Barbara Malaya, and Krzysztof Z. Gajos. 2021. To Trust or to Think: Cognitive Forcing Functions Can Reduce Overreliance on AI in AI-assisted Decision-making. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW1, Article 188 (April 2021), 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3449287 [8] Zana Buçinca, Siddharth Swaroop, Amanda E. Paluch, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Krzysztof Z. Gajos. 2025. Contrastive Explanations That Anticipate Human Misconceptions Can Improve Human Decision-Making Skills. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 1024, 25 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713229 [9] Federico Cabitza, Andrea Campagner, Riccardo Angius, Chiara Natali, and Carlo Reverberi. 2023. AI Shall Have No Dominion: on How to Measure Technology Dominance in AI-supported Human decision-making. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 354, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581095 [10] Emma R. Casolin and Flora D. Salim. 2024. Towards Understanding Human-AI Reliance Patterns Through Explanation Styles. In Companion of the 2024 on ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (Melbourne VIC, Australia) (UbiComp ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 861–865. doi:10.1145/3675094.3678996 [11] Federico Maria Cau, Hanna Hauptmann, Lucio Davide Spano, and Nava Tintarev. 2023. Effects of AI and Logic-Style Explanations on Users’ Decisions Under Different Levels of Uncertainty. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 13, 4, Article 22 (Dec. 2023), 42 pages. doi:10.1145/3588320 [12] Federico Maria Cau and Lucio Davide Spano. 2025. The Influence of Curiosity Traits and On-Demand Explanations in AI-Assisted Decision-Making. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1440–1457. doi:10.1145/3708359.3712165 [13] Valerie Chen, Q. Vera Liao, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, and Gagan Bansal. 2023. Understanding the Role of Human Intuition on Reliance in Human-AI Decision-Making with Explanations. 7, CSCW2, Article 370 (Oct. 2023), 32 pages. doi:10.1145/3610219 [14] Chun-Wei Chiang, Zhuoran Lu, Zhuoyan Li, and Ming Yin. 2023. Are Two Heads Better Than One in AI-Assisted Decision Making? Comparing the Behavior and Performance of Groups and Individuals in Human-AI Collaborative Recidivism Risk Assessment. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 348, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581015 [15] Hyesun Choung, Prabu David, and Arun Ross. 2023. Trust in AI and Its Role in the Acceptance of AI Technologies. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 39, 9 (2023), 1727–1739. doi:10.1080/10447318.2022.2050543 [16] Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. 2017. Algorithmic decision making and the cost of fairness. In Proceedings of the 23rd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining . 797–806. [17] NAJ Cornelissen, RJM Van Eerdt, HK Schraffenberger, and Willem FG Haselager. 2022. Reflection machines: increasing meaningful human control over Decision Support Systems. Ethics and Information Technology 24, 2 (2022), 19. doi:10.1007/s10676-022-09645-y [18] Nils Dahlbäck, Arne Jönsson, and Lars Ahrenberg. 1993. Wizard of Oz studies: why and how. In Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Intelligent user interfaces . Association for Computing Machinery, 193–200. doi:10.1145/169891.169968 [19] Devleena Das and Sonia Chernova. 2020. Leveraging rationales to improve human task performance. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on intelligent user interfaces . 510–518. [20] Sander de Jong, Ville Paananen, Benjamin Tag, and Niels van Berkel. 2025. Cognitive Forcing for Better Decision-Making: Reducing Overreliance on AI Systems Through Partial Explanations. 9, 2, Article CSCW048 (May 2025), 30 pages. doi:10.1145/3710946 [21] Dominik Dellermann, Philipp Ebel, Matthias Söllner, and Jan Marco Leimeister. 2019. Hybrid intelligence. Business & Information Systems Engineering 

61, 5 (2019), 637–643. doi:10.1007/s12599-019-00595-2 [22] Berkeley J Dietvorst, Joseph P Simmons, and Cade Massey. 2015. Algorithm aversion: people erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. 

Journal of experimental psychology: General 144, 1 (2015), 114. [23] Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. 2017. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 (2017). [24] John J. Dudley and Per Ola Kristensson. 2018. A Review of User Interface Design for Interactive Machine Learning. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 

8, 2, Article 8 (June 2018), 37 pages. doi:10.1145/3185517 [25] Mary T. Dzindolet, Scott A. Peterson, Regina A. Pomranky, Linda G. Pierce, and Hall P. Beck. 2003. The role of trust in automation reliance. 

International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 58, 6 (2003), 697–718. doi:10.1016/S1071-5819(03)00038-7 Trust and Technology. [26] Sven Eckhardt, Niklas Kühl, Mateusz Dolata, and Gerhard Schwabe. 2024. A survey of AI reliance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03948 (2024). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2408.03948 [27] Susanne Gaube, Harini Suresh, Martina Raue, Alexander Merritt, Seth J Berkowitz, Eva Lermer, Joseph F Coughlin, John V Guttag, Errol Colak, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. 2021. Do as AI say: susceptibility in deployment of clinical decision-aids. NPJ digital medicine 4, 1 (2021), 31. From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 17 

[28] Ben Green and Yiling Chen. 2019. The Principles and Limits of Algorithm-in-the-Loop Decision Making. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 3, CSCW, Article 50 (Nov. 2019), 24 pages. doi:10.1145/3359152 [29] Ziyang Guo, Yifan Wu, Jason D. Hartline, and Jessica Hullman. 2024. A Decision Theoretic Framework for Measuring AI Reliance. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) (FAccT ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 221–236. doi:10.1145/3630106.3658901 [30] PA Hancock, Theresa T Kessler, Alexandra D Kaplan, Kimberly Stowers, J Christopher Brill, Deborah R Billings, Kristin E Schaefer, and James L Szalma. 2023. How and why humans trust: A meta-analysis and elaborated model. Frontiers in psychology 14 (2023), 1081086. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1081086 [31] Gaole He, Nilay Aishwarya, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2025. Is Conversational XAI All You Need? Human-AI Decision Making With a Conversational XAI Assistant. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 907–924. doi:10.1145/3708359.3712133 [32] Gaole He, Abri Bharos, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2024. To Err Is AI! Debugging as an Intervention to Facilitate Appropriate Reliance on AI Systems. In 

Proceedings of the 35th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Social Media (Poznan, Poland) (HT ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 98–105. doi:10.1145/3648188.3675130 [33] Gaole He, Stefan Buijsman, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2023. How Stated Accuracy of an AI System and Analogies to Explain Accuracy Affect Human Reliance on the System. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 7, CSCW2, Article 276 (Oct. 2023), 29 pages. doi:10.1145/3610067 [34] Gaole He, Lucie Kuiper, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2023. Knowing About Knowing: An Illusion of Human Competence Can Hinder Appropriate Reliance on AI Systems. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 113, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581025 [35] Maren Hinrichs, Thi Bich Diep Bui, and Stefan Schneegass. 2024. Exploring the Effects of User Input and Decision Criteria Control on Trust in a Decision Support Tool for Spare Parts Inventory Management. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia .313–323. [36] Kevin Anthony Hoff and Masooda Bashir. 2015. Trust in Automation: Integrating Empirical Evidence on Factors That Influence Trust. Human Factors 57, 3 (2015), 407–434. doi:10.1177/0018720814547570 PMID: 25875432. [37] Angel Hsing-Chi Hwang, Q Vera Liao, Su Lin Blodgett, Alexandra Olteanu, and Adam Trischler. 2025. ’It was 80% me, 20% AI’: Seeking Authenticity in Co-Writing with Large Language Models. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 9, 2 (2025), 1–41. [38] Daniel Kahneman. 2011. Thinking, fast and slow . macmillan. [39] Daniel Kahneman and Gary Klein. 2009. Conditions for intuitive expertise: a failure to disagree. American psychologist 64, 6 (2009), 515. [40] Patricia K. Kahr, Gerrit Rooks, Martijn C. Willemsen, and Chris C. P. Snijders. 2024. Understanding Trust and Reliance Development in AI Advice: Assessing Model Accuracy, Model Explanations, and Experiences from Previous Interactions. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 14, 4, Article 29 (Dec. 2024), 30 pages. doi:10.1145/3686164 [41] Sunnie S. Y. Kim, Q. Vera Liao, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Stephanie Ballard, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. 2024. "I’m Not Sure, But...": Examining the Impact of Large Language Models’ Uncertainty Expression on User Reliance and Trust. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) (FAccT ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 822–835. doi:10.1145/3630106.3658941 [42] Wouter Kool and Matthew Botvinick. 2018. Mental labour. Nature human behaviour 2, 12 (2018), 899–908. [43] Vivian Lai, Chacha Chen, Alison Smith-Renner, Q. Vera Liao, and Chenhao Tan. 2023. Towards a Science of Human-AI Decision Making: An Overview of Design Space in Empirical Human-Subject Studies. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 

(Chicago, IL, USA) (FAccT ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1369–1385. doi:10.1145/3593013.3594087 [44] Nancy K Lankton, D Harrison McKnight, and John Tripp. 2015. Technology, humanness, and trust: Rethinking trust in technology. Journal of the association for information systems 16, 10 (2015), 1. doi:10.17705/1jais.00411 [45] John D. Lee and Katrina A. See. 2004. Trust in Automation: Designing for Appropriate Reliance. Human Factors 46, 1 (2004), 50–80. doi:10.1518/hfes. 46.1.50_30392 PMID: 15151155. [46] Benedikt Leichtmann, Christina Humer, Andreas Hinterreiter, Marc Streit, and Martina Mara. 2023. Effects of Explainable Artificial Intelligence on trust and human behavior in a high-risk decision task. Computers in Human Behavior 139 (2023), 107539. [47] Jennifer M. Logg, Julia A. Minson, and Don A. Moore. 2019. Algorithm appreciation: People prefer algorithmic to human judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 151 (2019), 90–103. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2018.12.005 [48] Luca Longo, Mario Brcic, Federico Cabitza, Jaesik Choi, Roberto Confalonieri, Javier Del Ser, Riccardo Guidotti, Yoichi Hayashi, Francisco Herrera, Andreas Holzinger, Richard Jiang, Hassan Khosravi, Freddy Lecue, Gianclaudio Malgieri, Andrés Páez, Wojciech Samek, Johannes Schneider, Timo Speith, and Simone Stumpf. 2024. Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) 2.0: A manifesto of open challenges and interdisciplinary research directions. Information Fusion 106 (2024), 102301. doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2024.102301 [49] Zhuoran Lu, Dakuo Wang, and Ming Yin. 2024. Does More Advice Help? The Effects of Second Opinions in AI-Assisted Decision Making. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 8, CSCW1, Article 217 (April 2024), 31 pages. doi:10.1145/3653708 [50] Shuai Ma, Qiaoyi Chen, Xinru Wang, Chengbo Zheng, Zhenhui Peng, Ming Yin, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2025. Towards Human-AI Deliberation: Design and Evaluation of LLM-Empowered Deliberative AI for AI-Assisted Decision-Making. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 261, 23 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713423 18 Raees and Papangelis 

[51] Shuai Ma, Ying Lei, Xinru Wang, Chengbo Zheng, Chuhan Shi, Ming Yin, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2023. Who Should I Trust: AI or Myself? Leveraging Human and AI Correctness Likelihood to Promote Appropriate Trust in AI-Assisted Decision-Making. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 759, 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581058 [52] Shuai Ma, Xinru Wang, Ying Lei, Chuhan Shi, Ming Yin, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2024. “Are You Really Sure?” Understanding the Effects of Human Self-Confidence Calibration in AI-Assisted Decision Making. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 840, 20 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642671 [53] Scott Mayer McKinney, Marcin Sieniek, Varun Godbole, Jonathan Godwin, Natasha Antropova, Hutan Ashrafian, Trevor Back, Mary Chesus, Greg S Corrado, Ara Darzi, et al. 2020. International evaluation of an AI system for breast cancer screening. Nature 577, 7788 (2020), 89–94. [54] Siddharth Mehrotra, Chadha Degachi, Oleksandra Vereschak, Catholijn M. Jonker, and Myrthe L. Tielman. 2024. A Systematic Review on Fostering Appropriate Trust in Human-AI Interaction: Trends, Opportunities and Challenges. ACM J. Responsib. Comput. 1, 4, Article 26 (Nov. 2024), 45 pages. doi:10.1145/3696449 [55] Tim Miller. 2023. Explainable AI is Dead, Long Live Explainable AI! Hypothesis-driven Decision Support using Evaluative AI. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Chicago, IL, USA) (FAccT ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 333–342. doi:10.1145/3593013.3594001 [56] Katelyn Morrison, Donghoon Shin, Kenneth Holstein, and Adam Perer. 2023. Evaluating the Impact of Human Explanation Strategies on Human-AI Visual Decision-Making. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 7, CSCW1, Article 48 (April 2023), 37 pages. doi:10.1145/3579481 [57] Katelyn Morrison, Philipp Spitzer, Violet Turri, Michelle Feng, Niklas Kühl, and Adam Perer. 2024. The Impact of Imperfect XAI on Human-AI Decision-Making. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 8, CSCW1, Article 183 (April 2024), 39 pages. doi:10.1145/3641022 [58] Matthew J Page, Joanne E McKenzie, Patrick M Bossuyt, Isabelle Boutron, Tammy C Hoffmann, Cynthia D Mulrow, Larissa Shamseer, Jennifer M Tetzlaff, Elie A Akl, Sue E Brennan, Roger Chou, Julie Glanville, Jeremy M Grimshaw, Asbjørn Hróbjartsson, Manoj M Lalu, Tianjing Li, Elizabeth W Loder, Evan Mayo-Wilson, Steve McDonald, Luke A McGuinness, Lesley A Stewart, James Thomas, Andrea C Tricco, Vivian A Welch, Penny Whiting, and David Moher. 2021. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ 372 (2021). doi:10.1136/bmj.n71 [59] Raja Parasuraman and Dietrich H Manzey. 2010. Complacency and bias in human use of automation: An attentional integration. Human factors 52, 3 (2010), 381–410. doi:10.1177/0018720810376055 [60] Saumya Pareek, Niels van Berkel, Eduardo Velloso, and Jorge Goncalves. 2024. Effect of Explanation Conceptualisations on Trust in AI-assisted Credibility Assessment. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 8, CSCW2, Article 383 (Nov. 2024), 31 pages. doi:10.1145/3686922 [61] Alison Parkes. 2017. The effect of individual and task characteristics on decision aid reliance. Behaviour & Information Technology 36, 2 (2017), 165–177. [62] Muhammad Raees, Vassilis-Javed Khan, Ioanna Lykourentzou, and Konstantinos Papangelis. 2026. Do People Appropriately Rely on AI-Advice? An Analytical Review of HCI Research on Human-AI Decision-Making. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Barcelona, Spain) (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791467 [63] Muhammad Raees, Inge Meijerink, Ioanna Lykourentzou, Vassilis-Javed Khan, and Konstantinos Papangelis. 2024. From explainable to interactive AI: A literature review on current trends in human-AI interaction. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 189, September 2024 (2024), 103301. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2024.103301 [64] Muhammad Raees and Konstantinos Papangelis. 2026. Trust to Reliance: Measurement Constructs for Human-AI Appropriate Reliance. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 695, 7 pages. doi:10.1145/3772363.3798835 [65] Gonzalo Ramos, Christopher Meek, Patrice Simard, Jina Suh, and Soroush Ghorashi. 2020. Interactive machine teaching: a human-centered approach to building machine-learned models. Human–Computer Interaction 35, 5-6 (2020), 413–451. [66] Charvi Rastogi, Yunfeng Zhang, Dennis Wei, Kush R. Varshney, Amit Dhurandhar, and Richard Tomsett. 2022. Deciding Fast and Slow: The Role of Cognitive Biases in AI-assisted Decision-making. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 6, CSCW1, Article 83 (April 2022), 22 pages. doi:10.1145/3512930 [67] Giuseppe Romeo and Daniela Conti. 2026. Exploring automation bias in human–AI collaboration: a review and implications for explainable AI. AI & SOCIETY 41, 1 (2026), 259–278. [68] Sara Salimzadeh, Gaole He, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2023. A Missing Piece in the Puzzle: Considering the Role of Task Complexity in Human-AI Decision Making. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (Limassol, Cyprus) (UMAP ’23) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 215–227. doi:10.1145/3565472.3592959 [69] Sara Salimzadeh, Gaole He, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2024. Dealing with Uncertainty: Understanding the Impact of Prognostic Versus Diagnostic Tasks on Trust and Reliance in Human-AI Decision Making. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 25, 17 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3641905 [70] Nicolas Scharowski, Sebastian AC Perrig, Melanie Svab, Klaus Opwis, and Florian Brühlmann. 2023. Exploring the effects of human-centered AI explanations on trust and reliance. Frontiers in Computer Science 5 (2023), 1151150. doi:10.3389/fcomp.2023.1151150 [71] Nicolas Scharowski, Sebastian AC Perrig, Nick von Felten, and Florian Brühlmann. 2022. Trust and reliance in XAI–Distinguishing between attitudinal and behavioral measures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12318 (2022). [72] Max Schemmer, Andrea Bartos, Philipp Spitzer, Patrick Hemmer, Niklas Kühl, Jonas Liebschner, and Gerhard Satzger. 2023. Towards effective human-AI decision-making: The role of human learning in appropriate reliance on AI advice. In Forty-Fourth International Conference on Information From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 19 

Systems (Hyderabad, India) (ICIS 2023 Proceedings) . AISEL, 1–17. https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2023/hti/hti/14 [73] Max Schemmer, Niklas Kuehl, Carina Benz, Andrea Bartos, and Gerhard Satzger. 2023. Appropriate Reliance on AI Advice: Conceptualization and the Effect of Explanations. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Sydney, NSW, Australia) (IUI ’23) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 410–422. doi:10.1145/3581641.3584066 [74] Nadine Schlicker and Markus Langer. 2021. Towards warranted trust: A model on the relation between actual and perceived system trustworthiness. In Proceedings of mensch und computer 2021 . 325–329. [75] Jakob Schoeffer, Maria De-Arteaga, and Niklas Kühl. 2024. Explanations, Fairness, and Appropriate Reliance in Human-AI Decision-Making. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 836, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642621 [76] Jakob Schoeffer, Johannes Jakubik, Michael Vössing, Niklas Kühl, and Gerhard Satzger. 2025. AI reliance and decision quality: Fundamentals, interdependence, and the effects of interventions. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 82 (2025), 471–501. doi:10.1613/jair.1.15873 [77] Phoebe Sengers, Kirsten Boehner, Shay David, and Joseph’Jofish’ Kaye. 2005. Reflective design. In Proceedings of the 4th decennial conference on Critical computing: between sense and sensibility . 49–58. [78] Keng Siau and Weiyu Wang. 2018. Building trust in artificial intelligence, machine learning, and robotics. Cutter business technology journal 31, 2 (2018), 47–53. [79] Janet A Sniezek and Timothy Buckley. 1995. Cueing and cognitive conflict in judge-advisor decision making. Organizational behavior and human decision processes 62, 2 (1995), 159–174. [80] Hannah Snyder. 2019. Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines. Journal of Business Research 104 (2019), 333–339. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.07.039 [81] Steve G Sutton, Vicky Arnold, and Matthew Holt. 2022. An extension of the theory of technology dominance: understanding the underlying nature, causes and effects. Causes and effects (2022). [82] Siddharth Swaroop, Zana Buçinca, Krzysztof Z. Gajos, and Finale Doshi-Velez. 2024. Accuracy-Time Tradeoffs in AI-Assisted Decision Making under Time Pressure. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Greenville, SC, USA) (IUI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 138–154. doi:10.1145/3640543.3645206 [83] Siddharth Swaroop, Zana Buçinca, Krzysztof Z. Gajos, and Finale Doshi-Velez. 2025. Personalising AI Assistance Based on Overreliance Rate in AI-Assisted Decision Making. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1107–1122. doi:10.1145/3708359.3712128 [84] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. 1981. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. science 211, 4481 (1981), 453–458. [85] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. 1989. Rational choice and the framing of decisions. In Multiple criteria decision making and risk analysis using microcomputers . Springer, 81–126. [86] Helena Vasconcelos, Matthew Jörke, Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin, Tobias Gerstenberg, Michael S. Bernstein, and Ranjay Krishna. 2023. Explana-tions Can Reduce Overreliance on AI Systems During Decision-Making. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 7, CSCW1, Article 129 (April 2023), 38 pages. doi:10.1145/3579605 [87] Tiffany C Veinot, Hannah Mitchell, and Jessica S Ancker. 2018. Good intentions are not enough: how informatics interventions can worsen inequality. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 25, 8 (2018), 1080–1088. [88] Oleksandra Vereschak, Gilles Bailly, and Baptiste Caramiaux. 2021. How to Evaluate Trust in AI-Assisted Decision Making? A Survey of Empirical Methodologies. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW2, Article 327 (Oct. 2021), 39 pages. doi:10.1145/3476068 [89] Xinru Wang and Ming Yin. 2023. Watch out for updates: Understanding the effects of model explanation updates in ai-assisted decision making. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–19. [90] Andrew Westbrook, Daria Kester, and Todd S Braver. 2013. What is the subjective cost of cognitive effort? Load, trait, and aging effects revealed by economic preference. PloS one 8, 7 (2013), e68210. [91] Earl L Wiener. 1981. Complacency: Is the term useful for air safety. In Proceedings of the 26th corporate aviation safety seminar , Vol. 117. 116–125. [92] Magdalena Wischnewski, Nicole Krämer, and Emmanuel Müller. 2023. Measuring and Understanding Trust Calibrations for Automated Systems: A Survey of the State-Of-The-Art and Future Directions. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg, Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 755, 16 pages. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581197 [93] Claes Wohlin. 2014. Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a replication in software engineering. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (London, England, United Kingdom) (EASE ’14) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 38, 10 pages. doi:10.1145/2601248.2601268 [94] Fumeng Yang, Zhuanyi Huang, Jean Scholtz, and Dustin L. Arendt. 2020. How do visual explanations foster end users’ appropriate trust in machine learning?. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Cagliari, Italy) (IUI ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 189–201. doi:10.1145/3377325.3377480 20 Raees and Papangelis 

A Metrics A.1 Objective Metrics 

Over-reliance = Number of correct initial decisions changed to incorrect due to AI advice Total number of decisions with initial disagreement Under-reliance = Number of incorrect final decisions despite correct AI advice Total number of decisions with initial disagreement Relative AI Reliance (RAIR) = Positive AI reliance Positive AI reliance + Negative self-reliance Relative-Self-Reliance (RSR) = Positive self-reliance Positive self-reliance + Negative AI reliance Accuracy-wid = Number of correct final decisions with initial disagreement Total number of decisions with initial disagreement Weight of Advice (WOA) = |Advice − Initial estimate ||Final estimate − Initial estimate |

Accuracy = Number of correct decisions Total number of decisions Agreement Fraction = Number of decisions same as the system Total number of decisions Switch Fraction = Number of decisions user switched to agree with the system Total number of decisions with initial disagreement AI-effect on Accuracy = Number of changes to correct decisions due to AI advice Number of correct AI decisions 

A.2 Subjective Metrics 

• Subjective Trust Rating: A self-reported measure of how much a user trusts the AI system. 

• Trust in Automation: The belief that the AI system will perform tasks reliably and effectively. 

• Affinity for Technology: A user’s general attitude and comfort level with using technology. 

• Understanding: The degree to which the user comprehends how the AI system works or makes decisions. 

• Confidence Rating: A user’s self-assessed certainty in their own decision or judgment. 

• Usefulness/Helpfulness: Perceived benefit or support provided by the AI in completing the task. 

• Mental Demand / Task Load: The cognitive effort required to complete the task with or without AI assistance. 

• Appropriateness: How suitable or contextually correct the AI’s behavior or involvement is perceived to be. 

• Comfort: The ease and lack of stress experienced while interacting with the AI. 

• Preference: A user’s choice or inclination toward using the AI system over alternatives. 

• Complexity: The perceived difficulty or intricacy of the task or the AI system itself. 

• Enjoyment: The degree of pleasure or positive experience while using the AI. 

• Satisfaction: Overall contentment with the interaction or outcome involving the AI. 

• Personality Traits: Individual differences that may influence AI reliance behavior. 

• Motivation: The internal drive or reasons behind engaging with the task or the AI system. From Trust to Appropriate Reliance 21 

B Summaries of Review 

> Table 4. Objective and subjective measures used in studies. The objective reliance measures are used to study how users fare with decisions. Trust is a commonly used subjective measure. Other measures are used to understand users’ interaction with systems.

Category Reported Measures Reliance Accuracy [ 8, 11 , 12 , 14 , 31 – 34 , 49 , 50 , 52 , 69 , 73 , 75 , 82 , 83 ], Agreement Fraction [ 9 , 31 – 34 , 50 , 52 , 69 ], Switch Fraction [ 31 –34 , 50 , 52 , 69 ], AI-effect on Accuracy [ 7 –9, 72 ], Weight of Advice [ 9 ], AI Safety [ 9], Human Error [7] Appropriate Reliance Over-reliance [ 7, 11 , 12 , 14 , 49 , 50 , 52 , 57 , 75 , 82 , 83 , 86 , 94 ], Under-reliance [ 11 , 14 , 49 , 50 , 52 , 57 , 75 , 94 ], RAIR [ 9, 31 – 34 , 57 , 69 , 72 , 73 , 83 ], RSR [ 9 , 31 – 34 , 57 , 69 , 72 , 73 ], Accuracy-wid [ 31 , 33 , 34 , 52 , 69 ], Deception of Reliance [57] Others Subjective Trust Rating [ 7 , 50 , 86 , 94 ], Trust in Automation [ 31 – 34 , 69 ], Affinity for Technology [ 31 –34 , 69 ], Understanding [ 14 , 31 , 50 , 94 ], Confidence Rating [ 11 , 12 , 14 , 49 , 50 , 52 , 73 , 94 ], Usefulness/help-fulness [ 33 , 34 , 50 , 82 ], Mental Demand (and/or Task Load) [ 7, 12 , 32 , 50 , 52 ], Appropriateness [ 8, 11 ], Preference [ 7 , 12 , 83 , 94 ], Complexity [ 7, 50 , 52 , 82 ], Enjoyment [ 8, 83 , 86 ], Satisfaction [ 50 , 52 ], Per-sonality Traits [82, 83], Motivation [8, 83] 

> Table 5. Research uses various types of decision-making tasks in several real-world and toy domains, ranging from high-stakes (healthcare) to low-stakes (leisure), to study human reliance patterns.

Domains Decision-Task General Hotel Reviews [32, 73], Hand-written Digits Identification [11], Leaf Classification [94] Critical Domains Medical Diagnostic [9], Drug Prescription [82, 83], Recidivism [14] Business Income Prediction [52], Banking [6], Loan Approval [33], Profession/Job Prediction [12, 75] Educational Nutrition [7], Student Performance [66], Analytical Reasoning (Text [11, 34]), Admissions [50] Leisure Bird Classification [ 57 ], Maze Completion [ 86 ], News Classification [ 60 ], Trip Planning [ 69 ], Logic Puzzles [82, 83], Exercise Recommendation [8], Movie Reviews [49] 

> Table 6. A summary of intervention mechanics (datasets and ML models), decision-making types (binary and multi-class), and target population type. There is a diverse use of datasets. The majority of studies recruit crowd-workers.

Category Studies Participants Users [9], Crowd-workers [7, 8, 11, 31–34, 52, 57, 69, 72, 73, 75, 82, 83, 86], General [94] Decisions Binary [ 7, 9, 11 , 14 , 31 –33 , 52 , 73 , 75 , 94 ], Multi-Class [ 8, 9 , 11 , 34 , 57 , 69 , 72 , 82 , 83 , 86 ], Value [ 9]Dataset Type COMPASS [ 14 ], Income [ 52 ], Food Ingredients [ 7], Leaf [ 94 ], Reviews and Text Classification [ 11 ,32 , 34 , 49 , 73 , 75 ], Students [ 50 ], Loan [ 31 , 33 ], Medical (Images, X-Rays, ECG, MRI, Profiles, etc.) [9, 82, 83], Natural or General Images [11], Birds [57, 72], Job Applications [12] ML Models SVM [ 73 , 94 ], Logistic/Linear/OLS Regression [ 33 , 50 , 52 ], Gradient Boosting [ 12 , 31 ], RoBERTa [49], ResNet50 [72], LogiFormer [34], CNN [11], BERT [32] 22 Raees and Papangelis 

> Table 7. An overall summary of included studies. Studies mostly use empirical evaluations with the crowd-worker population, and favor the multi-stage decisions. Studies mostly explore binary or multi-class decisions. Diverse explanation methods are used with a high focus on example-based and feature-based XAI. Notes: Most reported attributes ( •) are mutually non-exclusive.

Study Type Target Decisions Tasks Explanations 

Sr Study Ref Year Empirical Qualitative Mixed Users Crowd-workers General Single-stage Multi-stage Binary Multi-class Value Model-based Feature-based Example-based General 1 Yang et al. [94] 2020 • • • • •

2 Buçinca et al. [7] 2021 • • • • •

3 Schemmer et al. [73] 2023 • • • • • •

4 Schemmer et al. [72] 2023 • • • • •

5 Cabitza et al. [9] 2023 • • • • • • •

6 Vasconcelos et al. [86] 2023 • • • • •

7 He et al. [34] 2023 • • • • •

8 He et al. [33] 2023 • • • • •

9 Cau et al. [11] 2023 • • • • • • •

10 Chiang et al. [14] 2023 • • • • •

11 Ma et al. [52] 2024 • • • • • •

12 Salimzadeh et al. [69] 2024 • • • • •

13 Schoeffer et al. [75] 2024 • • • • •

14 He et al. [32] 2024 • • • • •

15 Morrison et al. [57] 2024 • • • • • •

16 Swaroop et al. [82] 2024 • • • • • •

17 Lu et al. [49] 2024 • • • • •

18 He et al. [31] 2025 • • • • •

19 Swaroop et al. [83] 2025 • • • • • •

20 Buçinca et al. [8] 2025 • • • • •

21 Cau and Spano [12] 2025 • • • • • •

22 Ma et al. [50] 2025 • • • • •

Total 22 20 0 2 1 20 1 4 20 14 10 1 3 11 6 6