Title: Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24735v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:10:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 

## ROSHNI KAUSHIK, Fujitsu Research of America, USA 

## MAARTEN SAP, Carnegie Mellon University, USA 

## KOICHI ONOUE, Fujitsu Research of America, USA 

AI-mediated communication is increasingly being utilized to help facilitate interactions; however, in privacy sensitive domains, an AI mediator has the additional challenge of considering how to preserve privacy. In these contexts, a mediator may redact or withhold information, raising questions about how users perceive these interventions and whether explanations of system behavior can improve trust. In this work, we investigate how explanations of redaction operations can affect user trust in AI-mediated communication. We devise a scenario where a validated system removes sensitive content from messages and generates explanations of varying detail to communicate its decisions to recipients. We then conduct a user study with 180 participants that studies how user trust and preferences vary for cases with different amounts of redacted content and different levels of explanation detail. Our results show that participants believed our system was more effective at preserving privacy when explanations were provided ( 𝑝 < 0.05 , Cohen’s 𝑑 ≈ 0.3). We also found that contextual factors had an impact; participants relied more on explanations and found them more helpful when the system performed extensive redactions ( 𝑝 < 0.05 , Cohen’s 𝑓 ≈ 0.2). We also found that explanation preferences depended on individual differences as well, and factors such as age and baseline familiarity with AI affected user trust in our system. These findings highlight the importance and challenge of balancing transparency and privacy in AI-mediated communications and suggest that adaptive, context-aware explanations are essential for designing privacy-aware, trustworthy AI systems. CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → HCI design and evaluation methods ; User studies ; • Security and privacy 

→ Usability in security and privacy .Additional Key Words and Phrases: Explanations; Trust; Privacy-preserving systems; Human–AI interaction; Transparency; User study 

ACM Reference Format: 

Roshni Kaushik, Maarten Sap, and Koichi Onoue. 2026. Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions. In Proceedings of ACM (Association of Computing Machinery) Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’26). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 25 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

1 Introduction 

As AI systems are increasingly integrated into everyday communication, researchers have been exploring their role not only as assistants that respond to direct user queries but also as intermediaries that shape the flow of information between people. For example, AI systems are already being used to support multilingual communication through real-time translation [ 43 ], to simplify specialized texts for broader audiences [ 1], and to remove sensitive information 

Authors’ Contact Information: Roshni Kaushik, Fujitsu Research of America, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, rkaushik@fujitsu.com; Maarten Sap, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, msap2@andrew.cmu.edu; Koichi Onoue, Fujitsu Research of America, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, konoue@fujitsu.com. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. Manuscript submitted to ACM Manuscript submitted to ACM 1

> arXiv:2603.24735v1 [cs.HC] 25 Mar 2026

2 Kaushik, et. al. from shared records in healthcare [ 4 ]. In these cases, the AI is no longer a passive tool, but is an active mediator making decisions about what to share with whom and how to present those decisions. Increasing efforts to develop AI intermediaries suggest their potential to become an important participant in human-human interactions. One particularly challenging and underexplored setting for AI-mediated communication is the preservation of privacy. In high-stakes domains, different parties may have different permissions to access sensitive data. For example, a clinician might share records with a specialist, while an AI system redacts personally identifiable information to comply with privacy regulations. In a workplace setting, an AI could help managers and employees collaborate while removing sensitive HR details. In research collaborations, an AI might enable data sharing between institutions by removing data that particular parties should not have access to. In these settings, the AI mediator does not simply summarize or transmit information, but actively redacts content. This creates a fundamentally different interaction paradigm where the AI alters messages while attempting to preserve trust and understanding between the humans involved. Unlike traditional settings where AI outputs are evaluated for accuracy, the system must balance both privacy protection and interaction satisfaction, raising questions about how users interpret and respond to AI-mediated redactions. 

In this work, we examine how humans perceive AI interventions in privacy-preserving scenarios, focusing on AI explanations of redactions, which has been underexplored in previous work. This setting provides a new lens on trust in AI systems, and users must reason about what the AI shows and withholds. In contrast to standard explanation settings, where explanations justify observed model outputs, explanations in these scenarios must justify intentional transformations of the content. This shifts the user’s task from evaluating the correctness of visible outputs to reasoning about potentially missing information and correctness of the system’s redaction, which introduces additional challenges for calibrating system trust and reliance. We focus on explanations as they are increasingly incorporated into AI outputs (e.g. reasoning models such as deepseek-r1 [ 13 ], openai-o1 [ 18 ]) and serve as the primary mechanism for explaining the AI’s intervention. Prior work suggests that explanations can act as double-edged swords; they may increase perceived transparency and trust, but they can also lead to over-reliance or reduce user scrutiny of the system [ 42 ]. This tension is particularly powerful in privacy-preserving scenarios, where users must decide whether to accept or question an AI’s redaction decisions. While explanations can clarify why information was withheld and help users understand the system’s behavior, they also introduce design trade-offs. Explanations that are absent or too general may make the AI’s actions seem arbitrary or confusing, while explanations that are too detailed risk overwhelming users or inadvertently disclosing private information. This tension is particularly seen in privacy-sensitive contexts, where longer outputs increase the probability of exposing memorized or private content [ 5 ], highlighting the conflict between transparency and privacy. To study this, we craft a scenario where an AI mediator is tasked with removing any sensitive information that is sent by one party with information access before sending the redacted version to another party without information access. As previous work has shown that information asymmetry can negatively impact the trust of those with access to less information [ 2], we designed the AI mediator to provide an explanation to the party without access to improve their trust and explain the redaction actions that the system performed. More concretely, we devised a communication setup between two parties: (1) an external collaborator , a human participant without access to private information, and (2) a researcher , simulated for this work and with access. An AI mediator ( coordinator ) facilitates communication between the two parties. As shown in the example in Figure 1, the 

coordinator redacts private information from the researcher ’s messages and provides explanations of its decisions to the collaborator . We verified the technical robustness of our AI mediator by validating its privacy preservation capabilities in our setup. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 3     

> Fig. 1. Conceptual overview of AI-mediated communication. The AI coordinator mediates between a researcher and collaborator
> by redacting sensitive information and providing an explanation to the recipient.

Using our verified system, we conducted a study with 180 participants to explore how user trust, system understanding, and explanation preferences change by systematically varying both the amount of sensitive information required to be redacted and the level of explanation detail. Specifically, we ask three research questions: 

• Does providing an explanation to the collaborators improve their trust in and understanding of the system? 

• How does the amount of sensitive information removed from the researcher ’s message affect the collaborators ’explanation preferences? 

• Do individual differences (e.g., demographic or attitudinal factors) influence trust and explanation preferences? Our results show that participants believed our system was more effective at preserving privacy when explanations were provided ( 𝑝 < 0.05 , Cohen’s 𝑑 ≈ 0.3). We also found that contextual factors had an impact; participants relied more on explanations and found them more helpful when the system performed extensive redactions ( 𝑝 < 0.05 , Cohen’s 𝑓 ≈

0.2). Individual characteristics further influenced trust; for example, those with a baseline familiarity or trust in AI/LLM systems were also more likely to trust our system. Explanations for AI-mediated communication that preserve privacy present a complex challenge, requiring a careful balance between transparency and protection of sensitive information. Our work highlights this difficulty by exploring how different redaction strategies and explanation styles affect user understanding and trust. By examining these interactions, we shed light on design principles and open questions that can guide future research on creating AI-mediated systems that are both privacy-aware and user-friendly. 

2 Related Work 

Previous research relevant to our work includes contributions from AI-mediated interaction, privacy-preserving communication, explanation design, and trust in AI systems. Together, these areas highlight interesting intersections between protecting sensitive content and maintaining user understanding. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

4 Kaushik, et. al. 

2.1 AI Mediation of Human Communication 

Research in HCI has begun to characterize AI not just as a tool but as an active intermediary that modifies and reshapes interpersonal exchanges. Hancock et al. offer a foundational framework for AI-mediated communication, where intelligent agents modify or generate messages on behalf of a human [ 14 ]. They articulate key characteristics, such as the magnitude of involvement, media type (text, audio, video, etc.), optimization goal, autonomy, and role orientation (who the AI is operating on behalf of). This allows us to understand the various ways that AI can intervene in human communication. Other research has shown that trust perceptions in senders diminish when recipients know that AI is involved, but surprisingly trust increased when AI wrote interpersonally rather than transactionally [32]. Psychology studies have also revealed how humans attribute agency, responsibility, and trust in mediated contexts. Users often reassess blame when AI mediates, and trust in the human communicator remains high. However, some responsibility can shift to the AI when interactions fail, known as the moral crumple zone phenomenon [ 17 ]. Frameworks such as AI-Mediated Exchange Theory [ 33 ] explain these types of trust shifts in the balance of social exchange. Research on human perceptions based on the author of certain texts found that only when participants thought they saw a mix of AI and human-written profiles, they mistrusted hosts whose profiles were labeled as or suspected to be written by AI [ 19 ]. These works position AI mediation as not only a technical innovation, but also a social intervention that has implications for trust and sense of agency. However, prior work has not yet examined how AI mediation shapes trust and understanding when the system is actively altering messages for privacy reasons. Our work addresses this gap by studying explanations as a mechanism to support trust in privacy-preserving AI mediation. 

2.2 Privacy-Preserving Communication 

Privacy is a critical concern in mediated communication, especially in domains like healthcare, workplace collaboration, and research. Nissenbaum’s foundational framework for contextual integrity argues that privacy is maintained when information flow follows contextual norms [ 40 ]. HCI research has explored many methodologies to protect sensitive information while enabling collaboration, including for selective redaction, access controls, and data anonymization [ 4 ]. Advances in natural language processing have enabled automatic detection and redaction of private information, but these methods face trade-offs between privacy and utility [ 41 , 45 ]. Redacting too much information can reduce message clarity, but not redacting enough can lead to privacy leaks. Security and privacy research has begun to systematically evaluate these trade-offs. For example, recent work has investigated the vulnerabilities of LLMs in the extraction of personal information and the effectiveness of redaction as a countermeasure [ 7, 31 ]. Studies have also explored how contextual integrity can serve as a framework for auditing privacy risks with language models [37]. From an HCI perspective, there have been calls for research on how LLM design paradigms affect disclosure behaviors, mental models and preferences for privacy control, and the design of tools, systems, and artifacts that empower users to reclaim ownership over their personal data [ 29 ]. Setting the correct expectations for AI can drastically change the users’ perspective of the system and interaction [ 24 ], and adding design paradigms, such as explanations, must balance informativeness while preserving privacy. Other efforts have emphasized the need for user empowerment in the privacy preservation process through interactive AI tools [ 46 ]. However, it remains unclear how different explanation strategies interact with the varying levels of redaction that a system might perform to impact user trust and comprehension. Our work addresses this open question by systematically studying these factors in an AI-mediated, privacy-preserving communication scenario. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 5

2.3 Explanations in AI-mediation 

Explanations are a central mechanism to help users understand AI behavior. Work in explainable AI has shown that explanations influence how people understand, predict, and evaluate system decisions [ 36 ]. HCI researchers emphasize that explanations must align with users’ goals and preferences to improve human-AI collaboration [ 12 ]. Design-oriented reviews of human–XAI interaction further highlight that explanations should be interactive, context-aware, and tailored to the needs of different users to support effective decision-making [ 8]. When AI acts as a mediator, explanations can clarify why information was altered or withheld and can help users maintain a coherent understanding of the interaction. Recent work has also found that AI-generated explanations could have a large impact on human trust, and factors such as the AI background of the user can heavily influence the interpretation of explanations [ 11 ]. Prior research also suggests that individual user characteristics can meaningfully shape how people interpret and rely on explanations in decision-making contexts [ 21 ]. This motivates our addition of background and personality questions as part of our user questionnaire. Beyond usability concerns, explanations are also closely tied to broader discussions of accountability and ethics in AI systems. Researchers argue that transparency mechanisms such as explanations are essential for holding algorithmic systems accountable and enabling meaningful oversight [ 3]. At the same time, ethical analyses of AI systems emphasize the importance of transparency alongside bias mitigation and responsible system design to ensure trustworthy deployment of AI technologies [35]. However, explanations in mediated communication can raise unique challenges. Explanations can act as double-edged swords by increasing perceived transparency and trust, but also promoting to over-reliance or reduce user scrutiny of the system’s outputs [ 42 ]. This tension is particularly powerful in privacy-preserving scenarios, where users must decide whether to accept or question an AI’s decision to redact information. Surveys of privacy-preserving explainable AI highlight that explanations themselves may leak sensitive details if not designed carefully [ 10 ]. Studies on attacks against explanations from models have shown that adversaries can sometimes infer private information from outputs that appear to be anonymized [ 44 ]. Reducing the amount of information disclosed to combat this can come at the cost of informativeness [ 39 ]. Systems have been developed that help users identify sensitive information and summarize relevant privacy policies, which has improved users’ understanding of data practices and privacy risks [ 6 ]. Additionally, prior work [25] has developed a tool to help users catch accidental private information leakage and found that the AI should account for context and user differences when providing explanations for privacy modifications. Together, these findings suggest that explanations can have a powerful impact in privacy contexts, but issues such as context-dependence and accidental privacy leakage must also be considered. How people actually experience and evaluate explanations when an AI mediates their communication with another human is an underexplored area. Our work addresses this gap by examining how both explanation detail and redaction amount shape preferences, trust, and understanding in a privacy-sensitive, AI-mediated setting. 

2.4 Trust in AI and Human-AI collaboration 

Trust has long been recognized as a critical factor in the way people interact with intelligent systems. Lee et al. [ 28 ]explored how trust influences control strategies and how responsibility was allocated between humans and systems. Later frameworks such as the Intelligent Systems Technology Acceptance Model integrated transparency and acceptance into intelligent system models [ 49 ]. In human-AI collaboration, maintaining the appropriate level of trust is critical. Over trust can lead to overreliance, while under trust can lead to misunderstandings and lower use of the system. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

6 Kaushik, et. al. Recent HCI research explores these dynamics in AI-mediated decision making. Trust must be understood from the perspective of those who use AI systems and from those affected by their outputs, resulting in a complex multi-stakeholder dynamic [ 48 ]. A systemic overview of models and trust measures in [ 47 ] details the variety of approaches that can be applied in different scenarios. Explainability is often explored as a way to calibrate user trust and can help users understand system outputs and limitations [ 22 ]. Prior work also distinguishes between attitudinal trust (a user’s belief that a system is reliable) and behavioral reliance (the extent to which users actually follow or act on the system’s outputs). Recent research on explainable reliance-aware user interfaces emphasizes designing explanations that help users decide when to accept, question, or overrule AI recommendations [ 9]. We focus on attitudinal trust in this work. However, most of this research considers trust in systems that provide information rather than those who also can choose to withhold it. When an AI redacts information for privacy reasons, users must assess the reliability of the remaining information under conditions of incomplete information, which then shapes their trust in the system. Our work addresses this open research question by investigating trust in AI mediation, where explanations and privacy-preserving redactions intersect. 

3 AI-Redaction System Design    

> Fig. 2. Diagram of the interactions between the researcher ,collaborator , and coordinator , with tasks performed by each that include and do not include private information indicated.

We devise a scenario where our system (Figure 2) enables human-AI collaboration and mediates between two human roles: researcher and external collaborator . The researcher has performed some research (such as a user study) that they would like to share with the collaborator . However, there is information in the results, such as names and genders, that the collaborator cannot have access to. Our system sits between these two roles and performs privacy-preserving operations on the information the researcher is sharing to ensure that any information the collaborator does not have access to is removed. The collaborator can ask questions about the information to the researcher , and our system will remove any private information in the researcher ’s answer before sending it to the collaborator .In the system we implemented for this work, the human is the external collaborator , and the researcher is simulated by an LLM, as we are interested in the collaborator ’s understanding, trust, and explanation preferences. We focus on the collaborator perspective because collaborator s, unlike researcher s, must rely on AI explanations to interpret missing information, making their explanation needs particularly important in privacy-sensitive interactions [15, 36]. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 7Additionally, we consider a relatively simple redaction task, the removal of Personally Identifiable Information or PII; however, our approach could be extended in future work to more complex privacy-preserving scenarios. Figure 2 illustrates the tasks that the researcher , collaborator , and coordinator perform in this interaction, as well as which of these tasks include and do not include private information. The researcher and the coordinator both have access to the private information. The researcher shares the unredacted study results and answers to the collaborator 

questions. The coordinator takes that information, removes any private information, and generates an explanation for the collaborator that explains the privacy-preserving operations that were carried out on the researcher ’s information. The coordinator also performs some tasks for the purposes of our particular interaction and study that do not include private information, such as parsing the collaborator ’s input, compiling the redacted response for the collaborator ,and generating some sample questions that could be interesting to ask the researcher . Figure 6 (see Section A.1) includes an excerpt from an example interaction between the coordinator and the collaborator . GPT-4.1 was used for all LLM calls in this work, and more prompting details are included in Section A.2. 

3.1 Study Topics and Original Information 

Using an LLM, we generated five different study topics that did not require specialized knowledge to comprehend and could be interesting/applicable to most people. These topics were (1) the impact of gardening on mental health, (2) the effects of exercise on sleep, (3) the relationship between diet and mood, (4) the influence of social media on self-esteem, and (5) the role of mindfulness in stress reduction. For each study topic, we generated a set of user study results that included some private information about participants (e.g., names, ages, genders, ethnicities) and some general information that was not private (e.g., amount of sleep each night). We defined private information using standard NLP/HCI criteria, treating any attribute that could directly or indirectly identify a participant as private. and did not apply formal guarantees like k-anonymity. 

3.2 Questions and Amount of Sensitive Information 

Using an LLM, we generated 25 questions in three different redaction categories: high, moderate, and low. These redaction categories represent the amount of sensitive information present in the researcher ’s answer to a question that needs to be removed before it can be sent to the collaborator . Three examples of questions the collaborator are included below, one from each redaction category. 

• High : What did the oldest participant say about how exercise affected their sleep? 

• Moderate : How did women in the study describe their gardening experiences compared to indoor activities? 

• Low : How did participants describe the difference in their sleep quality between the two conditions? The answer to the high redaction question results in identifying this participant, so most/all of the answer should be removed. In contrast, the answer to the low redaction question requires little to no removal of sensitive information. We validated that the questions and the researcher ’s answers actually contain different amounts of sensitive information by testing with an LLM judge and found that the generated questions in the high redaction category contained more sensitive information than the moderate category and the moderate category contained more sensitive information than the low category. More details are included in Section A.3. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

8 Kaushik, et. al. 

3.3 Redacting Sensitive Information from Answers 

We next set up an LLM judge to test whether private information was present in an answer. We verified our LLM judge’s precision at this task by first asking two human coders to determine whether privacy was preserved for a subset of data (30 randomly selected pairs of (redaction answer, redacted explanation) from each redaction category). The human coders agreed for all of the data they evaluated. We then compared their evaluation to the LLM judge evaluating on the same subset. We found that the human coders and the LLM judge agreed for 93.9% of the data. This high alignment indicates that we should be able to trust the accuracy of the LLM evaluation on the larger dataset. This aligns with prior research that shows LLMs are effective at identifying and handling PII [ 26 ], supporting their use as reliable evaluators for privacy-related judgements. We then redacted sensitive information from the researcher answers and used the validated LLM-judge to test whether there was any private information remaining in the redacted answers. We found that our system protected private information for at least 98% of the data in each redaction category (more details in Section A.4). 

3.4 Explanations of Different Types 

Once we generated the answer and redacted answer to each question, we generated explanations in two distinct styles. Building on prior work [ 27 ] which explored how explanation styles influence trust, we further elaborate the distinction between general and thorough explanations as two points along a broader explanation design spectrum. In particular, we distinguish these styles by length and their level of abstraction and completeness. The general explanation is concise (1-2 sentences in our setting) and communicates high-level information about why information was withheld, without detailing the specific steps the system performed. In contrast, the thorough 

explanation is longer (3-5 sentences) and provides a more complete, step-by-step account of how the system identified and removed private information. This distinction allows us to compare explanations that prioritize conciseness against those that prioritize transparency and detail. Examples of these two explanation styles for the same answer and redacted answer are shown in Section A.5. We focus on these two explanation styles to explicitly explore the trade-offs introduced by increasing explanation detail. We hypothesize that more thorough explanations may reduce user misunderstanding and increase perceived transparency. However, longer and more detailed explanations increase the likelihood that an LLM may inadvertently reveal sensitive information or overwhelm the user with too much detail. In contrast, more general explanations may better preserve privacy and reduce user cognitive load, but risk not including enough detail. As we show in Section A.6, private information is being leaked in the thorough explanations, but not in the general explanations. The longer explanations led to a greater amount information leakage. We therefore decided to use the same privacy preserving procedure we used on the answer on the explanations. After information redaction, we found that there was no private information remaining in the explanations (see graph in Section A.6). 

4 User Study Design 

To explore our research questions, we conducted a user study (protocol approved by an internal ethics committee). The participants interacted with an LLM-simulated researcher through the AI coordinator , which applied appropriate redactions and provided explanations. Our two independent variables were explanation style (no explanation, general, thorough) and redaction needed (high, moderate, low). Through a survey, we measured our dependent variables of perceived trust in the system, subjective understanding of the system, and explanation preferences. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 9

4.1 Participants 

We first performed a power analysis to determine the appropriate number of participants to recruit. With three explanation styles, we determined that 180 participants ( 60 per group) should allow us to detect between a small effect (𝑓 = 0.20 results in a power of 0.661 ) and medium effect ( 𝑓 = 0.5 results in a power of 1.000 ). We recruited all our participants from Prolific with a qualification of being fluent in English and compensation of $4 per participant. Their average age was 33 .0, with 1.1% aged 18 − 19 , 45 .7% aged 20 − 29 , 30 .9% aged 30 − 39 , 13 .1% aged 40 − 49 , 6.3% aged 

50 − 59 , and 2.3% aged 60 − 69 . 52 .6% identified as male and 47 .4% as female. 3.4% identified as Asian, 70 .9% as Black, 

18 .3% as White, and 7.4% as Mixed. 

4.2 Study Procedure 

The participants first completed a brief introduction process that included instructions explaining their role as the 

collaborator interacting with a researcher through an AI coordinator . They were informed that some information might be withheld or modified from the researcher ’s responses and that the coordinator might provide some explanation for those modifications. They then completed a 5-question multiple choice quiz to ensure they understood the scenario, where they had to complete each question correctly (with multiple attempts allowed). The participants were randomly sorted into one of three explanation conditions: no explanation, general explanation, and thorough explanation. The coordinator then presented them with a list of topics and instructed them to choose one they found most interesting (top of Figure 6). The coordinator then responded with a summary of the findings on that topic and a list of questions that the participant could choose from to follow up. These questions were from one of the redaction categories (high, moderate, or low). The participant then chose a question from the provided list, and the coordinator responded with the redacted researcher answer, a redacted explanation based on the participant’s explanation condition, and a set of new follow-up questions in a different redaction category. This process continued for three questions, and the order of the redaction categories was randomized for each participant. This resulted in a between-subjects design for the first independent variable of explanation detail and a within-subjects design for the second independent variable of redaction amount. 

4.3 Measures and Hypotheses 

After three questions and answers, the participant was redirected to the survey, which had three sections. For the first two sections, a portion of the evaluation items were modified from [ 16 ] and [ 20 ], including an explanation satisfaction scale, a trust scale for the explainable AI context, and a checklist for trust between people and automation. The full questionnaires are included in Section A.7. 

4.3.1 Evaluation intended to explore explanation detail preferences. The first section was a series of evaluation items per interaction, one for each of the question-answer-explanation interactions the participant experienced. Each question, modified researcher answer, and explanation (if any) given were shown to the participant (example in Figure 3) to refresh their memory, and we asked five items (four 5-pt Likert, one free form) for each of these interactions, resulting in a total of 15 items in this section of the survey. These items were intended to explore how the amount of redaction in an interaction affected the participant’s trust and understanding in the system and explanation preferences. 

4.3.2 Evaluation intended to explore explanation detail and redaction amount interaction. In the second section, we asked participants 8 evaluation items ( 7 5-pt Likert, 1 free form) about their overall experiences with the system to 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

10 Kaushik, et. al. 

> Fig. 3. Screenshot of the question, redacted answer, and explanation (if provided) that are included for each per-interaction evaluation group

gauge their general explanation preferences and how the explanations that they received affected their trust and system understanding. 

4.3.3 Evaluation intended to explore interaction between user characteristics and trust in our system. In the last section, we included demographic evaluation items and some evaluation items about their attitudes and experience with AI. Previous research has found that background can impact trust in automated systems and the effect of explanations on that trust [ 11 ], so we wanted to obtain background information on our participants to see if there were correlations between their responses to these evaluation items and their experiences in the study. 

4.3.4 Hypotheses. We tested three hypotheses through our user study that address our research questions. 

• (H1): People will prefer an explanation over no explanation 

• (H2): Explanation preferences will vary between different redaction categories 

• (H3): People will have different levels of trust in the system, based on their background and experiences 

5 Results and Discussion 5.1 Explanations vs. No Explanations 

We first analyzed responses from the second part of the survey (Section 4.3.2), where participants answered Likert questions about their overall experiences with the system. Participants were divided into two groups for this analysis: 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 11 those who received an explanation and those who did not. We normalized the ( 1 − 5) responses to a 0 − 1 scale for plotting simplicity, and mean ratings with standard deviation bars are shown in Figure 4. We performed a Welch ANOVA (due to unequal variances) to compare between these two groups. We found a significant effect of explanation on participants’ trust in the system’s ability to preserve privacy ( 𝐹 (1, 101 ) = 3.95 , 𝑝 < 0.05 , Cohen’s 𝑑 = 0.337 ). Responses to the remaining questions did not reach significance, although trends were consistent with expectations. Participants who received explanations tended to report higher confidence in the system, perceived outputs as more predictable, considered the system more reliable and safe, and rated it as outperforming a novice user, although these differences were not significant.       

> Fig. 4. Responses of participants to Survey Section 4.3.2 about their overall experiences with the system, normalized to 0−1. The last set of bars illustrate the average across all questions. The value corresponding to the most positive response is shown in red. Significant differences are shown in red with one asterisk for 𝑝 <0.05 .

We also examined participants’ engagement from their free-text responses. We defined engagement by identifying minimal responses, defined as containing no response or keywords such as ‘no comment’, ‘none’, ‘n/a’, ‘nothing’, ‘no comments’, and ‘no additional’. In addition to identifying minimal responses, we also conducted a sentiment analysis using the Natural Language Toolkit [ 34 ]. Results, summarized in Table 1, show that participants who received explanations were more engaged, less likely to provided minimal responses, and more likely to write positive comments. They were also less likely to provide negative comments, indicating that explanations not only influence quantitative trust ratings but also positively affect subjective evaluations and engagement. 

> Table 1. Analysis of the minimal responses and positive/neutral/negative responses from free-response, separated by participants who received and did not receive an explanation.

No Explanation General + Thorough Explanations Minimal 34.0% 24.0% 

Positive 56.4% 60.2% 

Neutral 33.3% 35.2% 

Negative 10.3% 4.5% 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

12 Kaushik, et. al. 

5.1.1 H1: People will prefer an explanation over no explanation. These results provide partial support for the hypothesis. Participants who received explanations rated the system as more effective in protecting privacy than those who did not, indicating that explanations can improve trust in privacy-preserving systems. The pattern was reinforced by participants’ open-ended responses. Table 1 shows that explanations increased engagement, encouraged positive comments, and reduced negative feedback. Several participants who did not receive explanations expressed a desire for more information (“The system sometimes gave useful and detailed answers but other times withheld too much information without explanations.”), whereas others were not bothered by limited answers (“I had an easy experience with the system. [I]t did what it was supposed to despite not answering that one question that had to do with age.”). Participants who received explanations highlighted the value of transparency: one noted, “Better to honestly say that information cannot be revealed”, while another said, “The system appears to be trustworthy with the user’s private information.” These comments suggest that explanations signal reasoning and intent, which reassure users and support trust. These findings are consistent with prior research in explainable AI showing that explanations increase trust by improving perceived transparency [ 23 ]. Additionally, our results suggest that even for a relatively simple privacy-preservation task, such as PII removal, providing explanations can positively influence how users interpret and interact with the system. Beyond supporting user trust, explanations also support user agency by enabling users to assess whether system decisions align with their expectations. From a socio-technical perspective, this highlights that explanations shape not only perceptions of the system, but also the broader relationship between users and AI systems. When relevant information is withheld or explanations are unclear, users’ ability to critique the system’s assumptions or identify potential errors is limited. Explanations could therefore be used as mechanisms for increasing trust and as tools to support user investigation, accountability, and more informed human-AI interaction. 

5.2 Preference Variances by Amount of Redaction Needed 

We analyze responses from the first part of the survey (Section 4.3.1), where participants answered Likert questions for each of the three interactions they experienced in the study, corresponding to low, moderate, and high redaction cases. Participants were grouped according to the type of explanation they received: none, general, or thorough. Their responses ( 1–5) were normalized to a ( 0–1) for plotting simplicity, and Figure 5 shows the mean ratings with standard deviation bars for each of the four questions, illustrating how the’ perceptions changed across redaction levels. Because the groups exhibited unequal variances, we used a Welch ANOVA with Games–Howell post hoc tests to identify significant differences, which are marked in the plot. Significant differences emerged for the first question (top-left plot), which asked how well the modified answer matched participants’ expectations. For participants who did not receive an explanation, there was a significant effect of redaction level on perceived expectation-match (𝐹 (2, 115 .63 ) = 5.29 , 𝑝 < 0.01 , Cohen’s 𝑓 = 0.218 ), with high redaction cases matching expectations significantly more than low redaction cases ( 𝑝 < 0.01 ). Participants who received a general explanation showed a similar pattern (𝐹 (2, 105 .21 ) = 10 .35 , 𝑝 < 0.001 , Cohen’s 𝑓 = 0.305 ), again rating high redaction cases as significantly more aligned with their expectations than low redaction cases ( 𝑝 < 0.001 ). Across both groups, greater system intervention was associated with a stronger sense that the modified answer was appropriate or expected. Significant differences also emerged for the fourth question (bottom-right plot), which examined how well the explanation helped participants judge the system’s accuracy, reliability, and trustworthiness. Among participants who received a general explanation, redaction level significantly affected their ability to assess the system ( 𝐹 (2, 107 .25 ) =

3.26 , 𝑝 < 0.05 , Cohen’s 𝑓 = 0.2035 ), with moderate redaction cases yielding better assessments than low redaction cases. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 13             

> Fig. 5. Responses of participants to Survey Section 4.3.1 about their overall experiences with the system, normalized to 0−1.Responses are separated by the explanation received by participants and by the amount of redaction needed for the answer. The value corresponding to the most positive response is shown by a dotted line. Significant differences are shown in red with one, two, and three asterices for 𝑝 <0.05 ,𝑝 <0.01 , and 𝑝 <0.001 , respectively.

Participants who received a thorough explanation showed a similar effect ( 𝐹 (2, 112 .02 ) = 3.47 , 𝑝 < 0.05 , Cohen’s 𝑓 =

0.189 ), with high redaction cases producing better assessments than low redaction ones. In both explanation conditions, the explanation was more helpful when the system performed more extensive modifications. 

5.2.1 H2: Explanation preferences will vary between different redaction categories. Taken together, these results support our hypothesis. Participants relied more on explanations and found them more helpful, when the system performed more redaction. When the system intervened heavily, explanations provided crucial context that aided participants in evaluating whether the output was trustworthy and appropriate. In contrast, when the system performed minimal modification, explanations were less necessary, offering little additional benefit. This pattern indicates that the usefulness of explanations is sensitive to the degree of system intervention and that provided explanations should scale with the amount of redaction performed. These findings align with prior research showing that effective explanations must be tailored to context [ 30 ]. Too little explanation can leave users uncertain about why a system behaved as it did, while too much can overwhelm or feel redundant when system behavior is already clear. Our results extend this principle to privacy-preserving systems, demonstrating that the optimal level of explanation detail shifts based on how substantially the system modifies content. This suggests the existence of a “sweet spot” in which explanations provide just enough insight to support user understanding without creating unnecessary cognitive load. More broadly, this pattern is consistent with work on progressive or selective transparency, which proposes that explanation detail should be revealed gradually depending on user needs and the system’s level of intervention [ 38 ]. In our setting, explanations were particularly valued when redaction substantially changed the content, suggesting that explanation mechanisms for privacy-preserving systems may benefit from adapting based on the amount of modification performed by the system. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

14 Kaushik, et. al. 

Table 2. Significant Results from the Background and Experience Survey Questions. Significant differences are indicated with one, two, and three asterices for 𝑝 < 0.05 , 𝑝 < 0.01 , and 𝑝 < 0.001 , respectively.                                                                                   

> No Explanation General Explanation Thorough Explanation F-value Cohen’s f p-value F-value Cohen’s f p-value F-value Cohen’s f p-value Age Group 𝐹 (5,52 )=3.12 0.548 *
> Education Gender Familiar with modern technology
> 𝐹 (3,55 )=3.20 0.416 *
> Trust Technology 𝐹 (4,54 )=5.08 0.613 *
> Trust AI/LLM 𝐹 (3,55 )=3.55 0.440 ** 𝐹 (3,54 )=3.10 0.415 *
> Early technology adopter 𝐹 (3,55 )=5.19 0.532 **
> Confident in learning new technologies
> 𝐹 (3,55 )=4.11 0.474 *
> Trust output of system that they do not understand
> 𝐹 (4,54 )=10 .33 0.875 *** 𝐹 (4,53 )=5.05 0.618 **
> Importance of understanding how a system works Rely on AI system without understanding its reasoning
> 𝐹 (4,53 )=4.48 0.582 **
> Changed decisions based on AI output
> 𝐹 (4,54 )=3.49 0.508 *

5.3 Effect of Background and Experiences 

We finally analyze the results of the final part of the survey (Section 4.3.3) to determine if there were any correlations between the background/experiences of the participants and their trust in the system. We used an aggregated trust score (averaged across the questions in Section 4.3.1) and grouped participants by explanation condition (no explanation, general explanation, and thorough explanation). Table 2 shows the F-values, effect sizes, and p-values for each explanation style and for each demographic question. 

5.3.1 H3: People will have different levels of trust in the system based on their background and experiences. In general, these findings provide partial support for this hypothesis. Some individual difference factors, e.g., baseline trust in technology and AI, were strongly predictive of trust. These effects were consistent across multiple measures and conditions, suggesting that participants enter AI-mediated tasks with predefined dispositions that shape their evaluations. However, many other background variables did not produce significant effects, and the most significant findings were isolated to the no explanation condition. This pattern suggests that explanations play a stabilizing role on user trust, reducing the degree to which individual differences drive trust. When explanations were provided (general or thorough), trust levels became more uniform across demographic groups. Therefore, while certain personal dispositions matter, demographic characteristics alone (without taking explanations into account) are not predictors of trust, and their influence can be greatly minimized by an effective explanation design. Our findings align with prior research showing that user characteristics, such as familiarity with technology, trust in AI systems, and comfort with automation, shape how individuals respond to AI-driven tools [ 11 ]. In our study, trust was consistently higher among participants already predisposed to accept or rely on automation, regardless of the explanation condition. This pattern highlights a dual challenge for designers of privacy-preserving systems: 

• How do we maintain and appropriately calibrate the trust of users with a high baseline of confidence in AI without overwhelming them with unnecessary explanation? 

Manuscript submitted to ACM Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 15 

• How do we build trust among users with lower baseline confidence, who may need more support or tailored explanations to feel comfortable with the system? These findings suggest that adaptive or personalized explanation strategies may be essential. Systems that adjust explanation detail to user characteristics and provide accessible and contextually relevant information may better serve the goal of supporting trust across diverse user profiles. 

6 Conclusion 

As AI systems increasingly act as intermediaries in human communication, designing mechanisms that preserve privacy while maintaining user trust has become critical. This work examined how explanations can support trust in AI-mediated communication, particularly when sensitive information is redacted from messages. Our contributions included system development, technical validation, and user evaluation to explore the interplay between redaction, explanations, and individual differences in trust. We demonstrated that providing explanations significantly improves participants’ trust in the system’s ability to preserve privacy. Participants who received explanations also engaged more and viewed their experience more positively with the system compared to those who did not receive explanations. Additionally, our results indicate that the effectiveness of explanations is context-dependent. Explanations are most valuable when the system performs extensive redactions, helping users understand the scope of the modifications and the reasoning behind them. When fewer modifications are necessary, the explanations are less critical, suggesting that optimal explanation strategies should adapt to the degree of system intervention. Individual differences further affect trust in AI-mediated communication. Participants with more familiarity and trust in AI a priori were more likely to trust our system, but these differences were much more pronounced when explanations were not provided. Explanations were a stabilizing influence on user trust; trust levels became more uniform across demographic groups when explanations were provided. These findings highlight the importance of personalized or adaptive explanation strategies, which can tailor the level of detail to user characteristics and maximize trust without overwhelming or under-informing users. In general, our results provide actionable insights for designing privacy-preserving AI intermediaries. Effective explanations strike a balance between transparency and privacy, offering enough detail to build trust while avoiding unnecessary exposure of sensitive information. Future work should explore explanations in more diverse settings, including for different domains and more complex privacy protection systems, examine long-term trust evolution, and investigate adaptive explanation strategies that dynamically adjust to user characteristics and contextual information. Real-world trust dynamics may differ from the interactions explored in this work, particularly when users depend on redacted information to complete high-stakes tasks. Bridging this gap will require studying AI-mediated communication in more realistic environments, such as task-based settings where users must act on partially redacted information with real data constraints. Incorporating interactive and longitudinal evaluations can further capture how users adapt to redactions and explanations over time. By addressing these challenges, AI mediators can be designed to support privacy-preserving communication using explanations that improve user trust and understanding of the system. Alternative approaches could include providing a standardized explanation along with labels indicating the categories of PII removed, or personalizing explanations by incorporating individualized information such as perceived threat severity or worst-case privacy scenarios. While these strategies may increase transparency, our findings suggest that 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

16 Kaushik, et. al. explanation effectiveness strongly depends on contextual factors and individual differences. This highlights the value of developing adaptive explanation approaches that can select or tailor explanation styles based on the user and the context. Such mechanisms could enable AI mediators to support privacy-preserving communication while maintaining user trust and understanding. 

6.1 Limitations 

The user study focused on a controlled online setting with simulated communication scenarios, which may not fully capture the complexity of real-world interactions. We also collected the background and experience of the participants at the end of the study to avoid these questions affecting the responses of the participants during the study, but their background/experience responses were then affected by their study experience. 

Ethical Considerations 

Our user study protocol was reviewed and approved by an internal ethics committee. All online study participants were compensated for their time, and their Prolific IDs were collected solely for compensation purposes. 

Generative AI Statement 

During the development of the code used for our study and data analysis phase, we used code completion features of Github Copilot for plotting and analysis. For both of these cases, we never solely relied on the AI suggestions and always reviewed and edited the suggested code. During the writing of the paper, we used GPT for grammar and style editing, but did not use AI for any writing generation. 

References 

[1] Sílvia Araújo and Micaela Aguiar. 2023. Simplifying specialized texts with AI: a ChatGPT-based learning scenario. In International Conference in Information Technology and Education . Springer, 599–609. [2] Rosangela Violetti Bertolin, Antônio Carlos dos Santos, Juvêncio Braga de Lima, and Marcelo José Braga. 2008. Information asymmetry and trust in cooperative interactions. Revista de Administração Contemporânea 12 (2008), 59–81. ISBN: 1415-6555 Publisher: SciELO Brasil. [3] Madalina Busuioc. 2021. Accountable artificial intelligence: Holding algorithms to account. Public administration review 81, 5 (2021), 825–836. ISBN: 0033-3352. [4] Kelly Caine and Rima Hanania. 2013. Patients want granular privacy control over health information in electronic medical records. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 20, 1 (2013), 7–15. ISBN: 1067-5027 Publisher: Oxford Academic. [5] Nicholas Carlini, Chang Liu, Úlfar Erlingsson, Jernej Kos, and Dawn Song. 2019. The secret sharer: Evaluating and testing unintended memorization in neural networks. In 28th USENIX security symposium (USENIX security 19) . 267–284. [6] Chaoran Chen, Daodao Zhou, Yanfang Ye, Toby Jia-jun Li, and Yaxing Yao. 2025. CLEAR: Towards Contextual LLM-Empowered Privacy Policy Analysis and Risk Generation for Large Language Model Applications. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2410.13387 arXiv:2410.13387 [cs]. [7] Shuai Cheng, Shu Meng, Haitao Xu, Haoran Zhang, Shuai Hao, Chuan Yue, Wenrui Ma, Meng Han, Fan Zhang, and Zhao Li. 2025. Effective PII Extraction from LLMs through Augmented Few-Shot Learning. 8155–8173. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25/presentation/ cheng-shuai [8] Michael Chromik and Andreas Butz. 2021. Human-XAI interaction: a review and design principles for explanation user interfaces. In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction . Springer, 619–640. [9] José Cezar de Souza Filho, Rafik Belloum, and Káthia Marçal de Oliveira. 2024. Where are we and where can we go on the road to reliance-aware explainable user interfaces?. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC) . IEEE, 282–288. [10] Filip Karlo Dosilovic, Mario Brcic, and Nikica Hlupic. 2018. Explainable artificial intelligence: A survey. In 2018 41st International Convention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO) . IEEE, Opatija, 0210–0215. doi:10.23919/MIPRO.2018.8400040 [11] Upol Ehsan, Samir Passi, Q. Vera Liao, Larry Chan, I-Hsiang Lee, Michael Muller, and Mark O Riedl. 2024. The Who in XAI: How AI Background Shapes Perceptions of AI Explanations. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–32. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642474 [12] Upol Ehsan, Pradyumna Tambwekar, Larry Chan, Brent Harrison, and Mark O. Riedl. 2019. Automated rationale generation: a technique for explainable AI and its effects on human perceptions. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on intelligent user interfaces . 263–274. Manuscript submitted to ACM Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 17 

[13] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, and Xiao Bi. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 (2025). [14] Jeffrey T. Hancock, Mor Naaman, and Karen Levy. 2020. AI-mediated communication: Definition, research agenda, and ethical considerations. 

Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 25, 1 (2020), 89–100. ISBN: 1083-6101 Publisher: Oxford University Press. [15] Kevin Anthony Hoff and Masooda Bashir. 2015. Trust in automation: Integrating empirical evidence on factors that influence trust. Human factors 

57, 3 (2015), 407–434. ISBN: 0018-7208 Publisher: Sage Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. [16] Robert R. Hoffman, Shane T. Mueller, Gary Klein, and Jordan Litman. 2019. Metrics for Explainable AI: Challenges and Prospects. doi:10.48550/ arXiv.1812.04608 arXiv:1812.04608 [cs]. [17] Jess Hohenstein and Malte Jung. 2020. AI as a moral crumple zone: The effects of AI-mediated communication on attribution and trust. Computers in Human Behavior 106 (2020), 106190. ISBN: 0747-5632 Publisher: Elsevier. [18] Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, and Alex Carney. 2024. Openai o1 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16720 (2024). [19] Maurice Jakesch, Megan French, Xiao Ma, Jeffrey T. Hancock, and Mor Naaman. 2019. AI-mediated communication: How the perception that profile text was written by AI affects trustworthiness. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–13. [20] Jiun-Yin Jian, Ann M. Bisantz, and Colin G. Drury. 2000. Foundations for an empirically determined scale of trust in automated systems. International journal of cognitive ergonomics 4, 1 (2000), 53–71. ISBN: 1088-6362 Publisher: Taylor & Francis. [21] Malik Khadar, Amoligha Timma, Luka Ludden, and Harmanpreet Kaur. 2025. Explain it like I’m me: User Characteristics in XAI Decision-Making. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency . 1729–1744. [22] Sunnie S. Y. Kim, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Olga Russakovsky, Ruth Fong, and Andrés Monroy-Hernández. 2023. "Help Me Help the AI": Understanding How Explainability Can Support Human-AI Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Hamburg Germany, 1–17. doi:10.1145/3544548.3581001 [23] René F. Kizilcec. 2016. How Much Information?: Effects of Transparency on Trust in an Algorithmic Interface. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, San Jose California USA, 2390–2395. doi:10.1145/2858036.2858402 [24] Rafal Kocielnik, Saleema Amershi, and Paul N. Bennett. 2019. Will You Accept an Imperfect AI?: Exploring Designs for Adjusting End-user Expectations of AI Systems. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Glasgow Scotland Uk, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3290605.3300641 [25] Isadora Krsek, Anubha Kabra, Yao Dou, Tarek Naous, Laura A. Dabbish, Alan Ritter, Wei Xu, and Sauvik Das. 2025. Measuring, Modeling, and Helping People Account for Privacy Risks in Online Self-Disclosures with AI. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 9, 2 (May 2025), CSCW131:1–CSCW131:31. doi:10.1145/3711029 [26] Nataša Krčo, Zexi Yao, Matthieu Meeus, and Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye. 2026. RAT-Bench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Text Anonymization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12806 (2026). [27] Retno Larasati, Anna De Liddo, and Enrico Motta. 2020. The effect of explanation styles on user’s trust. In Proceedings of IUI workshop on Explainable Smart Systems and Algorithmic Transparency in Emerging Technologies , Vol. 2582. CEUR Workshop Proceedings. [28] John Lee and Neville Moray. 1992. Trust, control strategies and allocation of function in human-machine systems. Ergonomics 35, 10 (1992), 1243–1270. ISBN: 0014-0139 Publisher: Taylor & Francis. [29] Tianshi Li, Sauvik Das, Hao-Ping Lee, Dakuo Wang, Bingsheng Yao, and Zhiping Zhang. 2024. Human-Centered Privacy Research in the Age of Large Language Models. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2402.01994 arXiv:2402.01994 [cs]. [30] Brian Y. Lim, Anind K. Dey, and Daniel Avrahami. 2009. Why and why not explanations improve the intelligibility of context-aware intelligent systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM, Boston MA USA, 2119–2128. doi:10.1145/1518701.1519023 [31] Yupei Liu, Yuqi Jia, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. 2024. Evaluating LLM-based Personal Information Extraction and Countermeasures. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07291 (2024). [32] Yihe Liu, Anushk Mittal, Diyi Yang, and Amy Bruckman. 2022. Will AI console me when I lose my pet? Understanding perceptions of AI-mediated email writing. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 1–13. [33] Xiao Ma and Taylor W. Brown. 2020. AI-Mediated Exchange Theory. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2003.02093 arXiv:2003.02093 [cs]. [34] Yukun Ma, Haiyun Peng, and Erik Cambria. 2018. Targeted aspect-based sentiment analysis via embedding commonsense knowledge into an attentive LSTM. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 32. [35] George Benneh Mensah. 2023. Artificial intelligence and ethics: a comprehensive review of bias mitigation, transparency, and accountability in AI Systems. Preprint, November 10, 1 (2023), 1. [36] Tim Miller. 2019. Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artificial intelligence 267 (2019), 1–38. ISBN: 0004-3702 Publisher: Elsevier. [37] Niloofar Mireshghallah, Hyunwoo Kim, Xuhui Zhou, Yulia Tsvetkov, Maarten Sap, Reza Shokri, and Yejin Choi. 2023. Can llms keep a secret? testing privacy implications of language models via contextual integrity theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17884 (2023). [38] Deepa Muralidhar, Rafik Belloum, and Ashwin Ashok. 2025. Operationalizing selective transparency using progressive disclosure in artificial intelligence clinical diagnosis systems. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies (2025), 103591. ISBN: 1071-5819. [39] Thanh Tam Nguyen, Thanh Trung Huynh, Zhao Ren, Thanh Toan Nguyen, Phi Le Nguyen, Hongzhi Yin, and Quoc Viet Hung Nguyen. 2024. A Survey of Privacy-Preserving Model Explanations: Privacy Risks, Attacks, and Countermeasures. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2404.00673 arXiv:2404.00673 Manuscript submitted to ACM 18 Kaushik, et. al. 

[cs]. [40] Helen Nissenbaum. 2004. Privacy as Contextual Integrity. Washington Law Review 79 (2004). [41] Anwesan Pal, Radhika Bhargava, Kyle Hinsz, Jacques Esterhuizen, and Sudipta Bhattacharya. 2024. The empirical impact of data sanitization on language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.05978 (2024). [42] Eunkyu Park, Wesley Hanwen Deng, Vasudha Varadarajan, Mingxi Yan, Gunhee Kim, Maarten Sap, and Motahhare Eslami. 2025. Critical or Compliant? The Double-Edged Sword of Reasoning in Chain-of-Thought Explanations. https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.12001v2 [43] Roya Shahmerdanova. 2025. Artificial Intelligence in Translation: Challenges and Opportunities. Acta Globalis Humanitatis et Linguarum 2, 1 (2025), 62–70. ISBN: 3030-1718. [44] Reza Shokri, Martin Strobel, and Yair Zick. 2021. On the Privacy Risks of Model Explanations. In Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society . ACM, Virtual Event USA, 231–241. doi:10.1145/3461702.3462533 [45] Samuel Sousa and Roman Kern. 2023. How to keep text private? A systematic review of deep learning methods for privacy-preserving natural language processing. Artificial Intelligence Review 56, 2 (2023), 1427–1492. ISBN: 0269-2821 Publisher: Springer. [46] Bolun Sun, Yifan Zhou, and Haiyun Jiang. 2024. Empowering users in digital privacy management through interactive llm-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11906 (2024). [47] Takane Ueno, Yuto Sawa, Yeongdae Kim, Jacqueline Urakami, Hiroki Oura, and Katie Seaborn. 2022. Trust in Human-AI Interaction: Scoping Out Models, Measures, and Methods. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts . ACM, New Orleans LA USA, 1–7. doi:10.1145/3491101.3519772 [48] Oleksandra Vereschak, Fatemeh Alizadeh, Gilles Bailly, and Baptiste Caramiaux. 2024. Trust in AI-assisted Decision Making: Perspectives from Those Behind the System and Those for Whom the Decision is Made. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642018 [49] E. S. Vorm and David J. Y. Combs. 2022. Integrating Transparency, Trust, and Acceptance: The Intelligent Systems Technology Acceptance Model (ISTAM). International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 38, 18-20 (Dec. 2022), 1828–1845. doi:10.1080/10447318.2022.2070107 Manuscript submitted to ACM Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 19 

A Appendix A.1 Excerpt of example interaction between the coordinator and collaborator        

> Fig. 6. Excerpt of example interaction between the coordinator and collaborator . The conversation as well as tasks performed by the coordinator and researcher in the system are indicated.

The interaction (Figure 6) begins with the coordinator showing a list of topics that the collaborator can choose from, based on their interests. The collaborator then chooses a topic, which in this case is the relationship between diet and mood. This begins a series of steps, shown to the right of the figure. 

• The coordinator parses human input and passes the chosen study topic to the researcher .

• The researcher then generates study results based on that topic. These results include demographic information from the participants (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity), as well as data on their experiences during the experiment on mood with different diets. 

• The coordinator then removes private information from the study results and summarizes them for easy display to the collaborator .

• The coordinator generates a set of questions that could be interesting for the collaborator to ask to get more information about the results. 

• The coordinator lastly compiles the summarized and redacted results and sample questions and sends them to the collaborator .

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

20 Kaushik, et. al. The human collaborator can then choose a question from the set of sample questions based on their interest, and this again begins a series of tasks taken by the researcher and collaborator , shown to the left of the figure. 

• The coordinator sends the question from the collaborator to the researcher , who answers it based on the original study results. 

• The coordinator then redacts the researcher ’s answer, removing any private information. 

• The coordinator generates an explanation of any operations that were performed on the original answer and removes any private information from the generated explanation. 

• Lastly, the coordinator compiles the redacted answer and explanation to send to the collaborator .

A.2 Prompting Details 

We utilized GPT-4.1 (state-of-the-art at the time of the research) to generate study topics, original information, questions, and answers. We also utilized GPT-4.1 to redact sensitive information from both the original information and the answers. Due to regulations from our institution, we cannot include the full prompts for all generations, but for redaction, we instructed the LLM to remove all information that could potentially reveal the identity of an individual participant. For explanations, the LLM was instructed to generate an explanation of the specific style (general or thorough) that explains what the system did to transform the original information to the redacted information. We also utilized GPT-4.1 (with no history preserved) to validate redaction categories and redaction success for answers/original information (after LLM-judge was verified with human coders) 

A.3 Validating Redaction Categories       

> Fig. 7. LLM judge evaluation of amount of sensitive information across answers to questions in the three redaction categories: high, moderate, and low ( 1indicates a large amount of sensitive information, 0indicates every little). Significant differences are shown in red with three asterices for 𝑝 <0.001 .
> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 21 We asked an LLM judge to rate the amount of sensitive information from 0 to 1 present in each researcher to questions in the high, moderate, and low redaction categories. Figure 7 shows the results of the LLM judge results, separated by category. We can see that the categories have significantly different amounts of sensitive information based on an ANOVA ( 𝐹 (2, 372 ) = 218 .02 , 𝑝 < 0.001 ). A Tukey HSD post-hoc test resulted in all pairwise difference being significant at the 𝑝 < 0.001 level. 

A.4 Validating Privacy Protection of the Redacted Answer    

> Fig. 8. LLM judge evaluation of the privacy preservation success of our system to redact answers in the three redaction categories: high, moderate, and low ( 1indicates privacy is protected, 0indicates privacy is not protected).

We asked an LLM judge to determine whether privacy was preserved ( 1) or not ( 0) for each of the redacted answers. Figure 8 shows the results of the LLM judge results, separated by category. We can see that our system performs extremely well in protecting privacy in the redacted answer. 

A.5 Explanation Examples 

Examples of these two explanation styles for the same answer and redacted answer are included below. Example 1: 

• General : Identifying information, such as participant names, was removed from the original message to protect individual privacy. The message was then summarized to highlight the general experiences of participants sharing similar backgrounds, ensuring that all personally identifiable details and distinctive traits were excluded. The main findings were maintained in the summary, and the steps taken to ensure confidentiality were clearly outlined. 

• Thorough : To preserve privacy, the original message was modified by removing direct identifiers and specific contextual details that could reveal individual identities. All personal names and characteristics were omitted, 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

22 Kaushik, et. al. ensuring participants’ confidentiality. Experiences were attributed to a collective group background rather than to individuals, maintaining the accuracy of findings without distorting key insights. Unnecessary individual-specific details were summarized or excluded, with core sentiments and comparative observations about gardening versus indoor activities retained. The process involved identifying and removing sensitive information, followed by checks to confirm that the essential meaning and clarity of the statement were preserved. The final message presents the collective experiences in compliance with privacy standards, upholding both confidentiality and clarity. Example 2: 

• General : The participant’s name and ethnicity were removed for privacy preservation and verification, and the message was summarized by omitting specific details while retaining the key information about sleep experiences before and after exercise. 

• Thorough : In the privacy preservation process, personally identifiable information such as the participant’s name and their specific regional identity were removed to protect their anonymity, ensuring the message cannot be traced back to an individual. Verification involved checking that all sensitive details had been appropriately omitted, while still maintaining the accuracy and context of the account described. Summarization further streamlined the message, retaining key points about the participant’s sleep experiences with and without exercise, but excluding extraneous information irrelevant to the core findings. The overall process flow began with identifying sensitive personal data, then carefully editing the text to eliminate those elements, followed by reviewing the edited message for completeness and narrative integrity. As a result, the final message is both privacy-preserving and concise, allowing the participant’s experiences to be shared safely and effectively within a broader context. 

A.6 Validating Privacy Protection of the Redacted Explanation    

> Fig. 9. LLM judge evaluation of the privacy preservation success of our system to redact general and thorough explanations in the three redaction categories: high, moderate, and low ( 1indicates privacy is protected, 0indicates privacy is not protected).
> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 23    

> Fig. 10. LLM judge evaluation of the privacy preservation success of our system to redact general and thorough explanations in the three redaction categories: high, moderate, and low ( 1indicates privacy is protected, 0indicates privacy is not protected).

We asked an LLM judge to determine whether privacy was preserved ( 1) or not ( 0) for each of the unredacted and redacted explanations. Figure 9 shows the result of the LLM judge results, separated by category, of the private information in the unredacted explanations. We can see that there is no information leakage for general explanations. However, for thorough explanations, information leakage is occurring (more for the high redaction category and less for the low redaction category). Figure 10 shows the results of the LLM judge results on the redacted explanations, separated by category. We can see that our system performs extremely well in protecting privacy in the redacted explanations. 

A.7 Survey Questionnaires 

A.7.1 Questions intended to explore explanation detail preferences. 

(1) The researcher answer modified by the coordinator matched my expectations for a response to the question from you (strongly disagree to strongly agree) (2) The explanation given by the coordinator (if provided) helped me understand how the system works (strongly disagree to strongly agree, N/A) (3) The explanation given by the coordinator (if provided) had the appropriate amount of detail and was the appropriate length (far too little detail / much too short to far too much detail / much too long, N/A) (4) The explanation given by the coordinator (if provided) helped me assess how accurate, reliable, or trustworthy the system is (strongly disagree to strongly agree, N/A) (5) Please provide any additional comments or indicate if you wanted the system to explain anything else. 

A.7.2 Questions intended to explore explanation detail and redaction amount interaction. 

(1) I trust that the system preserved privacy appropriately over my entire interaction (strongly disagree to strongly agree) (2) The explanations (if provided) over the entire interaction helped me understand what the system was doing (strongly disagree to strongly agree, N/A) (3) I am confident in the system. I feel it works well (strongly disagree to strongly agree) 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

24 Kaushik, et. al. (4) The outputs of the system are very predictable (strongly disagree to strongly agree) (5) The system is very reliable. I can count on it to be correct (strongly disagree to strongly agree) (6) I feel safe that when I rely on the system, I will get the right answers (strongly disagree to strongly agree) (7) The system can perform the redaction of private information better than a novice human user (strongly disagree to strongly agree) (8) Please provide any additional comments or suggestions. 

A.7.3 Questions intended to explore interaction between user characteristics and trust in our system. 

(1) What is your age group? (2) What is your highest level of education? (3) What is your gender? (4) How familiar are you with modern technology? (not at all familiar to extremely familiar) (5) How much do you trust technology in general? (do not trust at all to completely trust) (6) How much do you trust Artificial Intelligence (AI) or Large Language Models (LLM) systems? (do not trust at all to completely trust) (7) How often do you use new technologies or digital tools before most people you know? (never to always) (8) How confident are you in your ability to learn and use new technologies? (not at all confident to extremely confident) (9) How much do you trust the output of a computer system when you do not understand how it works? (do not trust at all to completely trust) (10) How important is it for you to understand how a system works before you trust its output? (not at all important to extremely important) (11) How likely are you to rely on the output of an AI system if you do not understand its reasoning? (very unlikely to very likely) (12) Have you ever changed your decision based on the output of an AI or automated system? (never to always) 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Examining the Effect of Explanations of AI Privacy Redaction in AI-mediated Interactions 25 

Received 13 January 2026