Title: Relationships Between Trust, Compliance, and Performance for Novice Programmers Using AI Code Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18948v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Apr 2026 00:30:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 1

Relationships Between Trust, Compliance, and Performance for Novice Programmers Using AI Code Generation 

Nicholas Gardella 1, Matthew L. Bolton 1, and Sara L. Riggs 11Department of Systems and Information Engineering, University of Virginia 

Précis 

A study of 27 novice programmers using the GitHub Copilot AI-driven Development Environment explored correlations between pre-interaction trust, AI compliance, programming performance, and post-interaction trust. The results could not show a relationship from trust to compliance but did show positive relationships from compliance to performance and performance back to trust. 

Author Note 

This work was supported by the University of Virginia Distinguished Fellowship, NSF National Research Traineeship for Cyber-Physical Systems (1829004), Graduate Research Fellowship Program for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (1842490), and the Virginia Commonwealth Cyber Initiative Central Virginia Node (GR102900). We have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Nicholas Gardella, Olsson Hall, 151 Engineer’s Way, Charlottesville, VA 22904, United States. Email: njg4ne@virginia.edu 

> arXiv:2604.18948v1 [cs.HC] 21 Apr 2026

NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 2

Abstract Objective 

To explore how novice programmers’ trust in Artificial Intelligence-driven Development Environments (AIDEs) relates to their coding performance and AI compliance while programming under time pressure. 

Background 

Computer programming has undergone rapid upheaval due to state-of-the-art AIDEs, which provide clever automation for many aspects of software development. A longstanding interest of researchers of automation more generally has been the attitude of trust. Decades of research seek to explain how influencing trust can help to achieve desirable outcomes in different domains, but very limited work has provided similar focus on trust in AIDEs. 

Method 

We collected subjective measures of trust along with objective measures of performance and AIDE compliance from a diverse group of 27 novice programmers between two study locations. 

Results 

Our results corroborated traditional understandings of how trust changes through experiences. However, we did not find a relationship between trust and subsequent compliance during programming tasks. Greater compliance was associated with strong performance, and strong performance led to greater subsequent trust. 

Conclusion 

Our findings raise new questions about the utility of trust in the context of interacting with AIDEs and generative AI. We call for further research into the effect of trust on compliance to recommendations from imperfect AI. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 3

Application 

This work can inform the design of training and educational content for generative AI use within and beyond software development. Instructional designers should consider risks of AI misuse and disuse and focus on promoting desirable interaction outcomes, regardless of trust’s connection to them. 

Keywords: Artificial intelligence, Trust in automation, Compliance and reliance, Software, Human-automation interaction NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 4

Introduction 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology can be very effective within software development, a field which drives technological progress in a myriad of application domains. AI-driven Development Environments (AIDEs) can help to automate aspects of coding such as typing, translating, problem-solving, testing, and debugging. AIDEs typically offer chat messaging, interactive text editing, or both. Programmers can use AIDEs as addons to their existing Integrated Development Environments to generate new text, edit existing text, learn more about a topic, or take an action (e.g., run a terminal command). AIDEs can produce outputs that are fast, highly effective, and well-liked, but can also produce incorrect or unsafe code Gardella et al., 2024; Pearce et al., 2022; Vaithilingam et al., 2022; Weisz et al., 2021. As such, it is important to study how programmers can use AIDEs to boost their productivity and well-being without compromising the safety of anyone their software will impact Hoff and Bashir, 2015; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; Lindsey et al., 2025; Sadowski and Zimmermann, 2019. Unfortunately, it is not yet possible to ensure that AIDEs will effectively balance these goals Lindsey et al., 2025. Instead, human programmers must decide whether and to what extent they should rely on AIDEs. According to the human-automation interaction literature, this decision is largely based on a user’s trust in an automated system Hoff and Bashir, 2015; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; Passi and Vorvoreanu, 2022. With this connection, ensuring trust aligns closely with reliability should lead to ideal reliance. This work focuses on relationships between trust, compliance, and performance in the context of novice programmers using AIDEs. Novices, as compared to intermediate and advanced programmers, have limited programming expertise to bias their attitudes, intentions, and behaviors. They are ideal candidates for this work because their higher openness increases the likelihood of detecting any true relationships that might exist between trust, compliance, and performance. These three constructs have been central to several theoretical models of human-automation NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 5interaction Hoff and Bashir, 2015; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; Mayer et al., 1995, but have not been studied extensively in programmer-AI interactions. These constructs are important because they are measurable, interconnected, and either intrinsically desirable or responsive to intervention. Lee and See J. D. Lee and See, 2004 can be credited for popularizing the notion that trust, compliance, and performance interact cyclically, informing many later models Rodriguez Rodriguez et al., 2023. Performance is desirable because it is the purpose of the automation to begin with. Compliance and reliance can help optimize the automation’s effect on performance. Finally, interventions can target trust as an avenue for optimizing compliance and thus performance. However, the utility of trust is limited if these connections break down. Therefore, the goal of this work is to evaluate the relationships between novice programmers’ (a) trust in an AI code generator (b) compliance with the AI’s suggestions, and (c) programming performance. 

Trust, Compliance, and Performance 

Given the nascence of AIDEs, there is limited existing work about how trust, compliance, and performance are related for programmers using AI. However, the broader knowledge base around human-automation interaction supports a cyclic progression between these three constructs. Trust is thought to inform compliance, which, based on reliability, impacts performance, and trust is then adjusted based on performance Hoff and Bashir, 2015; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; Mayer et al., 1995. Figure 1 captures this expected cycle, which was crystallized by J. D. Lee and See, 2004. 

Note . Users start with an initial level of (a) trust in the AIDE. Next, trust informs (b) how much users comply with AIDE suggestions. When the AIDE is very reliable for the task at hand, this compliance impacts (c) performance. Depending on how the team performs, the user can reevaluate their (a) trust. In addition to theoretical evidence, empirical studies support that trust can predict compliance and be predicted by performance. Quantitative evidence for trust predicting compliance comes from the automation trust literature Daly, 2002; Merritt and Ilgen, NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 6

Figure 1 

Expected cycle of trust, compliance, and performance from automation trust literature. 

Note. Users start with an initial level of (a) trust in the AIDE. Next, trust informs (b) how much users comply with AIDE suggestions. When the AIDE is very reliable for the task at hand, this compliance impacts (c) performance. Depending on how the team performs, the user can reevaluate their (a) trust. 2008; Patton and Wickens, 2024; Wetzel, 2005, but many qualitative studies of AIDEs have suggested this connection as well Jayagopal et al., 2022; Perry et al., 2023; Ross et al., 2023; Vaithilingam et al., 2022. As for performance predicting trust, quantitative evidence is also from the automation literature, but AIDE-related studies have supported this connection, too Brown et al., 2024; “Investigating and Designing for Trust in AI-powered Code Generation Tools | Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,” n.d. The following subsections further detail the overlap between empirical work and the theoretical underpinnings of a trust-compliance-performance cycle. 

Trust 

Human trust in automation (Figure 1a) is generally considered an attitude one actor has toward relying on another whose reliability is not fully knowable Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; Mayer et al., 1995. Trust varies in its generality—i.e. in whom or under what circumstances does one trust Hoff and Bashir, 2015; Kramer, 1999; Marsh and Dibben, 2003; McKnight and Chervany, 2000; Merritt NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 7and Ilgen, 2008. Here we focus on one’s specific trust in an AIDE at several points in time. After the trustor becomes familiar with the trustee, but before any substantial interactions, they can provide a baseline level of specific trust Biros et al., 2003; Hoff and Bashir, 2015; Merritt and Ilgen, 2008. Thereafter, specific trust is "history-based" Kramer, 1999; J. Lee and Moray, 1992; Merritt and Ilgen, 2008 because accumulated interactions can be taken into consideration. Prior work has measured trust in AIDEs, but only once per participant. Amoozadeh et al. Amoozadeh et al., 2024 found that students in an earlier CS course trusted AIDEs more than those in a later course at the same school. Similarly, Perry et al. found a trend for participants who wrote more secure code to trust an AIDE less than those who wrote less secure code Perry et al., 2023. These trends may be attributable to automation bias, which causes users to over-value salient automated cues, even when more reliable information is available Mosier and Skitka, 1999. Novices, especially, may over-trust AIDEs by naively comparing their suggestions to more reliable feedback mechanisms like compiler messages Prather et al., 2024. Novices have also been found to trust AIDEs more for code comprehension than for code completion, perhaps because of better trust affordances Shah et al., 2025 or because of less perceived personal risk Mosier and Skitka, 1999. We are not aware of any studies taking repeated measures of trust in AIDEs, nor testing its effect on compliance. 

Compliance 

Compliance refers to acting on the advice of automation Dixon et al., 2007. Specific trust is thought to influence humans’ compliance and reliance on automation J. D. Lee and See, 2004, corresponding to the arrow between Figure 1a and Figure 1b; though, recent work questions the strength of this connection Patton and Wickens, 2024; Pharmer et al., 2025. Colloquially, terminology is used more loosely, but reliance is strictly defined as the choice not to act in the absence of an automation alarm Dixon et al., 2007; J. D. Lee and See, 2004. Therefore, the term compliance (Figure 1b) better NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 8describes depending on an AIDE by accepting suggested code, edits, or actions Dixon et al., 2007. Empirical work supports a small positive relationship between pre-interaction trust in automation and compliance within the interaction Patton and Wickens, 2024. Studies have found this connection in simulations of military decision support Daly, 2002, X-ray luggage screening tasks Merritt and Ilgen, 2008, and multitask driving scenarios Wetzel, 2005. Though similar quantitative evidence is lacking in the human-AIDE interaction context, several qualitative studies have suggested that trust in an AIDE can influence compliance Jayagopal et al., 2022; Perry et al., 2023; Ross et al., 2023; Vaithilingam et al., 2022. On the other hand, factors such as high workload Daly, 2002; Spain, 2009 and low operator self-confidence J. Lee and Moray, 1992 can also lead to greater compliance and reliance. When a user is confident to rely on their own abilities, they have a lesser need to use automation Dzindolet et al., 2003. In the previously mentioned study about AIDEs and code security, participants with more prior security experience tended to use the AI-generated code less Perry et al., 2023. It is not clear whether they did so because of low trust in AI or simply high self-confidence. The cause of AIDE compliance matters because numerous studies have claimed to show evidence of programmers over-relying on AIDEs Kazemitabaar et al., 2024; Prather et al., 2024; Ross et al., 2023; Shah et al., 2025; Vaithilingam et al., 2022. Typically, over-reliance would be considered "misuse" Parasuraman and Riley, 1997 of automation—a "poor calibration in which trust exceeds system capabilities" J. D. Lee and See, 2004. This aligns with studies observing participants accepting wrong or insecure code from an AIDE Perry et al., 2023; Ross et al., 2023. In contrast, other observations have been labeled over-reliance because of the risk, not the presence, of a bad outcome. For example, researchers often consider accepting large amounts of AI generated code without engaging with it (i.e., carefully reading or editing it) to be over-reliance Kazemitabaar et al., 2024; Shah et al., 2025; Vaithilingam et al., 2022. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 9However, if the code perfectly satisfies its intended need, the trust literature might consider such behavior to be appropriate reliance. One way to measure a bad outcome objectively is programming performance. 

Performance 

Performance is how well the human-automation team collectively performs the task at hand. In software development, it can be measured in many ways (e.g. readability, time complexity, or reliability), but for novices, the most relevant measures assess basic software functionality under time constraints McCracken et al., 2001. For example, novice programming performance can be quantified as the duration required to produce a program that passes an objective set of tests, or the number of tests passed within a specified period. In general, automation compliance improves performance when the automation is reliable for the task or degrades it otherwise Hoff and Bashir, 2015; J. D. Lee and See, 2004. AIDEs are very reliable for the types of simple programming tasks in which novices engage Chen et al., 2021; Finnie-Ansley et al., 2023. Novices also perform better with AIDE assistance than alone, so compliance should be positively related to performance, at least to some limit Fan et al., 2025; Gardella et al., 2024; Kazemitabaar et al., 2023. This corresponds to the arrow between Figure 1b and Figure 1c. Performance can be used to adjust subsequent specific trust J. D. Lee and See, 2004. The performance of the automation itself has been positively associated with trust in simulations of industrial automation J. Lee and Moray, 1992, military decision support Dzindolet et al., 2003, and multitask driving scenarios Wetzel, 2005. Extending these findings to the net performance of the human and the automation together, Merritt and Ilgen also found a direct relationship from performance to specific trust Merritt and Ilgen, 2008. Unfortunately, no studies have validated this link for the AIDE context. However, at least two studies cite the perception of suggestion quality as an important factor for the development of trust in an AI code generator Brown et al., 2024; “Investigating and NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 10 Designing for Trust in AI-powered Code Generation Tools | Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,” n.d. This suggests that performing well with an AIDE would increase a user’s trust in it provided that they notice how well they are performing Hoff and Bashir, 2015. This link corresponds to the arrow from Figure 1c back to Figure 1a, completing a cycle that can repeat over time. 

Research Questions & Contributions 

While the evolving knowledge base on human-AIDE interaction acknowledges the relevance of trust, compliance, and performance, there is a major gap in its ability to describe their interrelationships empirically. Most quantitative evidence to date comes from studies with other types of automation. Our contribution is to empirically evaluate the cyclical trust-compliance-performance theory popularized by J. D. Lee and See, 2004 in the context of human-AIDE interactions. To this end, we explore the following research questions in this study: • RQ1 : Does specific trust in an AIDE predict subsequent compliance (Figure 1, a to b)? • RQ2 : Does compliance predict performance when coding with an AIDE (Figure 1, b to c)? • RQ3 : Does programming performance predict subsequent specific trust in an AIDE (Figure 1, c to a)? To answer these research questions, we planned to test three hypotheses using one regression coefficient test for each research question. First, for RQ1, we expected a positive relationship from specific trust (Figure 1a) to compliance (Figure 1b) Daly, 2002; Merritt and Ilgen, 2008; Patton and Wickens, 2024; Wetzel, 2005. Due to the AIDE’s high reliability on simple programming tasks like the ones we use Chen et al., 2021; Finnie-Ansley et al., 2023, we also expected a positive relationship between compliance NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 11 (Figure 1b) and performance (Figure 1c) for RQ2 Hoff and Bashir, 2015; Klingbeil et al., 2024; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; McGuirl and Sarter, 2006. Finally, we expected a positive relationship from performance back to specific trust (Figure 1a, post-interaction) for RQ3 Dzindolet et al., 2003; J. Lee and Moray, 1992; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; Merritt and Ilgen, 2008; Wetzel, 2005. 

Method 

Data was collected at University of Virginia (UVA) in Spring 2023 and Virginia State University (VSU) in Spring 2024. Performance data from UVA was previously reported for a separate analysis Gardella et al., 2024. This research complied with the American Psychological Association Code of Ethics and was approved by the Institutional Review Board at UVA for participants recruited there and at both universities for participants recruited at VSU. Informed consent was obtained from each participant. 

Participants 

In total, 27 participants were recruited by convenience as volunteers (16 female; 10 male; 1 unknown; 10 Black; 8 Asian; 3 Asian & White; 4 White; 1 Latinx & Black; 1 Latinx & White). Only three participants had any prior experience with coding-specific AIDEs, but many (24) had tried general-purpose AI chatbots. Seventeen UVA students (11 female; 5 male; 1 unknown; 8 Asian; 3 Asian & White; 4 White; 1 Latinx & Black; 1 Latinx & White) were recruited from a 1000-level Introduction to Programming (CS1) course. Ten VSU students (5 female; 5 male; 10 Black) were recruited from a 1000-level Introduction to Programming (CS2) course. By consulting syllabi and faculty at both universities, we determined that students in this second-semester intro course would have similar programming abilities to the participants from UVA. Nonetheless, we explicitly accounted for site-to-site variation throughout the analysis. 

Experimental Setup 

Participants at both sites programmed in the popular Visual Studio Code (VS Code) Integrated Development Environment on an Apple iMac with Python 3 and the NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 12 GitHub Copilot IDE extension. At UVA, participants used GitHub Copilot circa 2023 (v1.79), while at VSU, participants used GitHub Copilot circa 2024 (v1.151) with GitHub Copilot Chat v0.11.1. This change kept VSU participants up to date with the newest supported versions available at the time and ensured that they did not encounter backwards compatibility issues with outdated remote services. Both versions provided inline suggestions and a multiple suggestions panel, but the newer version also had conversational options, context direction tools, and an interactive editor. Custom VS Code extensions provided task access, submission capabilities, and tracking of participants’ interactions with Copilot. The interface showed a countdown timer, a PDF with task instructions, and a Python editor containing an unimplemented function. Participants could run and test their code using either the terminal or point-and-click options. They could advance to the next task in a trial only once their solution for the current task passed all the tests provided in the dataset—HumanEval (https://github.com/openai/human-eval; Chen et al., 2021. 

Procedure 

Participants at both sites were guided through the same procedure. They provided informed consent electronically and were given an overview of the study and an opportunity to ask questions. A series of training videos was presented to familiarize participants with the programming environment, the task submission tool, the functionality of GitHub Copilot, and the risks and benefits of using it. Because Copilot’s functionality was expanded and the study software was updated slightly, participants at VSU were shown updated training videos on these topics to account for these updates. Participants at both sites viewed the same video about the risks and benefits of Copilot. While participants were shown different ways of using Copilot, they were not encouraged or discouraged from using any particular strategy. After each video, participants demonstrated their understanding either verbally or by completing the actions shown in the video. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 13 As part of a larger study design, participants completed four Python programming blocks—two alone with standard IntelliSense autocomplete and two with GitHub Copilot. The original quantitative analysis of the UVA data provides additional details on the programming tasks participants worked on during these trials Gardella et al., 2024. In each block, participants saw up to eight tasks, where they could only view the next task after completing the current one. The ten participants at VSU were given identical tasks and AI treatments as ten of the participants at UVA. This study focuses only on the AI-assisted blocks and includes results using data from both sites. Trust data was not collected for solo trials as the IntelliSense autocomplete built into VS Code is deterministic and thus was not relevant to this study’s research questions. As such, no comparison of trust in Copilot to a baseline of trust in IntelliSense was examined. Before and after each AI-assisted block, participants completed a questionnaire containing a specific trust scale adapted from the work of Muir and Moray Muir, 1989; Muir and Moray, 1996. For each trial, participants had 20 minutes to complete as many tasks as possible (up to eight). They were instructed to work for the best possible score, using the AI as much or little as needed. Bonus compensation was awarded to the top two scorers at each site to encourage adherence to this instruction. This was a key design choice for eliciting trust attitudes, as it created risk related to under-use or over-use of AI assistance during the time-pressured scenario Mayer et al., 1995; Mosier and Skitka, 1999. Figure 2 shows the timeline of specific trust measurements and programming tasks. Note that because participants also programmed alone as part of a larger counterbalanced design, specific trust measurements 1B and 2B were either taken in close succession (AI trials were back-to-back) or separated by one or two trials without AI. Counterbalancing means systematically varying the order of task sets used for each trial and the choice of which order to assign AI or solo conditions. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 14 

Figure 2 

Timeline of trust scale administration amidst AI-assisted Python programming. 

Measures of Trust, Compliance, and Performance 

Trust 

To measure trust in GitHub Copilot, we employed a specific trust scale adapted from the work of Muir Muir, 1989; Muir and Moray, 1996. Muir and Moray concluded that perceptions of competence (see Equation (1)), followed by predictability, dependability, and faith (see Equation (2)) were key determinants of trust Muir and Moray, 1996. As shown in Table 1, we adapted both these four measurement items and the ground-truth overall trust item from Muir, 1989 to our context. To avoid any ambiguity about the meaning of the word "trust" Bolton, 2022, this item was phrased as a perception of trustworthiness (reliability), which was clearly defined. The original scale was measured in millimeters on a paper instrument, so our digital version used a reasonable Miller, 1956 zero to ten scale (0 = ‘ Not At All’ or ‘ Least Trustworthy’ , 10 = ‘ Completely’ or ‘ Most Trustworthy’ ) with one point increments. Figure 3 shows an SEM path diagram for the five observed trust items; the measurement model contains four items as indicators, and the factor they indicate ought to correlate with the fifth (summary) item. Equation (3) shows our application of Equations (1) and (2) that handles the multicollinearity discussed in Muir and Moray, 1996. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 15 (Overall Trust Item) = 14 .1 + 0 .8 · Competence + ϵ (1) 

for residual ϵ

(Overall Trust Item) = β0 + β1 · Predictability + β2 · Dependability + β3 · Faith + ϵ (2) 

for coefficients β and residual ϵ

Table 1 

Subjective trust scale adapted from the Muir scale. 

Item Wording 

Competence How confident are you in Copilot to help you solve problems with code? Predictability How confident are you for Copilot to behave predictably? Dependability How confident are you in Copilot to help you avoid errors and bugs in your code? Faith Assuming you have access to it, how confident are you in Copilot to help you with future programming for work or school? Overall Trust Trustworthiness is the extent to which GitHub Copilot is useful enough and effective enough to rely on to help someone program. How trust-worthy do you think GitHub Copilot is? 

Note. The scale ranged from 0 to 10 with no decimals. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 16 

Figure 3 

SEM path diagram for the adapted Muir scale. 

Note. This Structural Equation Model (SEM) path diagram is composed of a four-indicator measurement model and an implied regression equation between an observed summary item (perceived trustworthiness) and the latent trust factor. We focused here on the mea-surement model only. (Trust Factor) = γ1 · (Overall Trust Item) + ζ

> 

Competence Predictability Dependability Faith 

> 

=

> 

λC

λP

λD

λF

> 

· (Trust Factor) +

> 

δC

δP

δD

δF

> 

(3) 

for coefficient γ, residual ζ, loadings λ, and measurement errors δ

Compliance 

Compliance to GitHub Copilot’s advice was operationalized by counting the total number of times that participants used built-in compliance features during each trial. This included accepting inline suggestions, shown as greyed-out text, or using a button in the multiple suggestions panel to accept one of its options. Notably, manual NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 17 copy-and-pasting or typing of viewed suggestions was not counted. The newer version of Copilot in study two generated additional sources of compliances: (1) using buttons in the chat panel for copying or inserting provided code blocks and (2) accepting code edits from the inline chat widget. Once again, manual copy-pasting and typing were not counted. Only if the user clicked a built-in copy button was a copy tracked. It was important to count all sources of compliances from study two in case participants chose newer features in lieu of older ones. 

Performance 

Performance was measured using an ordinal score reflecting how many tasks a participant completed in 20 minutes (0-8 points). We were not sure about the measurement level of this data, as it is not possible to make tasks perfectly exchangeable in difficulty. Ultimately, we treated the score as a ratio-level count based on its nature and distribution. To ensure this assumption did not bias our conclusions, we also considered a binary transformation for all relevant regressions. That is, for the Conclusion Sensitivity Analysis, score was recoded as either low or high against the median of all trials with AI across all 27 participants (2 completed tasks of a possible 8). A low score was one at or below the median (0-2), while a high score was one above the median (3-8). 

Data Analysis 

All statistics were computed in R Ihaka and Gentleman, 1996. Unless otherwise stated, we used the standard statistical significance threshold of α = .05. 

Scale Validation and Factor Analysis 

We assessed the internal consistency of the Muir scale using Cronbach’s Cronbach, 1951 α. Next, we performed single-factor Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) to assess unidimensionality. Goodness-of-fit for CFA models was assessed using an accepted spectrum of fit measures ( χ2 p-value > .05, CFI > .95, SRMR < .08, RMSEA < .06) Byrne and Byrne, 2006; Jackson et al., 2009. We compared two practically applicable CFA model structures using the Satorra-Bentler Satorra and Bentler, 2001 NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 18 scaled χ2 difference test. First, we loaded each item onto the factor equally to represent the common application of collapsing the item ratings from a trust scale with an arithmetic mean. Next, we allowed the item loadings to be estimated freely. We used the better model to compute trust factor scores for further analysis, and assessed test-retest reliability with a paired t-test and the Pearson correlation coefficient Pearson and Galton, 1997. 

Trust Score Computation 

For computing trust scores, we applied the four-indicator CFA model using lavaan Rosseel, 2012 with the lavaan::lavPredict(type="ov") function. This produced a score for each observed scale item response weighted by its contribution to the latent factor (determined by the CFA). We took row-wise means to produce latent factor scores distributed like the original data (not μ = 0 , σ2 = 1 ). 

Generalized Estimating Equations 

We explored the interrelationships of trust, compliance, and performance using Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE). GEE extends Generalized Linear Model (GLM) regression to relax the assumptions of observational independence and family-consistent residual dispersion by accounting for clustering during estimation Liang and Zeger, 1986. We also considered multi-level Bayesian regression, which aligns well to trust theory, but chose GEE as it is more robust and less sensitive to assumptions with as few clusters as our 27 D. McNeish and Stapleton, 2016; Pedroza and Truong, 2017. Compared to prior trust research that used pooled regression J. Lee and Moray, 1992; Merritt, 2011, using GEE allowed us to explicitly account for dependence in our repeated-measures data. Because we were not interested in using models for prediction, we were not concerned with the overall goodness-of-fit (i.e., R 2 or Information Criterion values). Rather, we were interested in the significance of each relationship and interpreting the coefficients. Therefore, we used coefficient Wald tests to assess statistical significance NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 19 according to regression coefficients and standard errors. To control Type I error, we used 

geesmv::GEE.var.mbn Wang, 2015 to compute Cluster Robust Standard Errors (CRSEs) via the Morel-Bokossa-Neerchal Morel et al., 2003 small-sample GEE correction D. McNeish and Stapleton, 2016; D. M. McNeish, 2014. The coefficients themselves were estimated with geepack::geeglm Højsgaard et al., 2006 with identical settings as geesmv. The working correlation structure was set to "exchangeable" with the two observations per cluster used for RQ1 and RQ2 but to autoregressive ("ar1" for geepack and "AR-M" for geesmv) with the four trust observations per cluster used for RQ3. The theoretical model in Figure 1 drove our choices for predictor and response measures, but we also included covariates for site and time. Trust scores were derived from the good-fit CFA models as described in Trust Score Computation and used as predictors for RQ1 and response measures for RQ3. Their symmetric distribution motivated a Gaussian family choice for RQ3. Compliances per trial were appropriately right skewed for a count process, motivating a Poisson family choice for RQ1. Performance score (at least ordinal; 0-8 points per trial) was right-skewed and treated as a Poisson process for RQ2. Given we used GEE and had more than seven discrete levels for both trust ratings and performance scores, relaxing assumptions about their measurement level was an ideal tradeoff over losing information and simplicity with an ordinal approach Rhemtulla et al., 2012. 

Conclusion Sensitivity Analysis 

We considered the basic assumptions of GEE and the sensitivity of our conclusions (i.e., the direction and significance of our target predictors) to different reasonable assumptions. Though GEE is exempt from some regression assumptions, it is important to consider linearity, model specification, and influential observations. After choosing appropriate response distribution families, we confirmed general linearity by visual inspection. When specifying GLM formulas, we added covariates to account for time and research site. Next, we used glmtoolbox::glmgee Vanegas et al., 2023 and NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 20 Cook’s Cook, 1977 distance (stats) to check our conclusions for sensitivity to possible influential observations. Given we omitted the "Overall Trust" summary item of the Muir scale (see Scale Validation and Factor Analysis) and used CFA-derived trust factor scores in a non-SEM analysis, we also checked for conclusion sensitivity to using a simple mean of all five items instead. Finally, we checked sensitivity to treating ordinal performance data as ratio-level (see Performance and Generalized Estimating Equations) using a binary transformation (i.e. at or below the median 0-2 points or above the median 3-8 points). This also called for a binomial family GEE when performance was the regression response. In each section of the Results to follow, we comment on the sensitivity of our results with respect to these three considerations: influential observations, trust aggregation, and performance measurement level. Otherwise, the data met the assumptions of GEE. 

Results Scale Validation and Factor Analysis 

The Muir scale (see Table 1) produced Cronbach’s α = .90 with the "ground truth" trustworthiness item included and α = .87 without it. This item was excluded from the measurement model on account of the covariance assumptions of CFA. The equal-weight four-indicator CFA fit poorly (Y-B χ2(6) = 56.96, p < .001, CFI R >.730, RMSEA R = 0.305, SRMR = 0.381). A freely estimated model of the four indicators was significantly better (S-B χ2 Diff. = 57.351, p <.001), and the overall fit was good (Y-B 

χ2(2) = 2.00, p = .37, CFI R >.999, RMSEA R = 0.002, SRMR = 0.022). We used this model for computing trust scores at each timepoint. Participants had no new experiences with the AI between timepoints 1B and 2A (see Figure 2). Trust scores were test-retest reliable between these points according to the paired t-test (t (26) = 0.520, p =.61) and Pearson correlation (r (25) = .93, p < .001). NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 21 

RQ1: Does specific trust in an AIDE predict subsequent compliance? 

We first examined the relationship between the computed factor score for specific trust before a trial began (Figure 2, Trust 1A and 2A) and the number of times participants accepted text from Copilot using the built-in compliance features. With a Poisson family, pre-trial trust, along with covariates to control for trial number (1 v. 2) and research site (UVA v. VSU), was used as a predictor of compliance count. Table 2 shows the results of the coefficient Wald tests based on the MBN CRSE correction. The exponentiation of the coefficients provides the multiplicative factor by which the models predict a single point of pre-trial specific trust (0 to 10) to scale the number of expected compliances during that trial. Pre-trial trust was not a statistically significant predictor of compliance, showing a slightly negative slope. The Conclusion Sensitivity Analysis revealed no sensitivity to trust aggregation or influential observations. Of note, the trust coefficient’s direction shifted from -1% to +1% when two influential clusters were excluded. There is no evidence that pre-trial trust was related to the number of times participants used the built-in compliance features. This finding calls into question the link in Figure 1 between trust (a) and compliance (b). The estimated working correlation of ̂

α = .83 supports the suspected observational dependence structure. The statistically significant covariates suggest higher compliance at UVA than at VSU and higher compliance on the second trial than on the first. 

RQ2: Does compliance predict performance when coding with an AIDE? 

Pre-trial trust did not seem to relate to compliance, but we also wanted to see whether increased compliance led to any differences in performance. To test this, we again used Poisson GEE regression with an exchangeable correlation structure and the MBN correction. Table 2 shows the results of the coefficient Wald tests. There was a small but statistically significant positive relationship between compliance and performance ( p < .01) corresponding to a roughly 2% improvement for each additional compliance (x ≈ 19, SD ≈ ˜x ≈ 14). The significance of trial number suggests NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 22 

Table 2 

Exchangeable Poisson GEE estimates relating pre-trial trust to compliance count. 

Variable B eB CRSE 95% CI 

LL UL 

Constant 2.91 ∗∗∗ ˆμ = 18 0.32 2.29 3.54 Site = VSU -0.87 ∗∗∗ -58% 0.26 -1.37 -0.36 Trial Number 0.20 ∗∗ +22% 0.07 0.06 0.33 Pre-Trial Trust (A) -0.01 -1% 0.05 -0.10 0.08 

Note . k = 27 clusters (participants) of balanced size ni = 2 (trials per participant). We estimated the population-averaged relationship between the computed factor score for pre-trial trust and the number of compliances using Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) with a Poisson link, exchangeable correlation structure, Morel-Bokossa-Neerchal (MBN) bias-corrected Cluster-Robust Standard Error (CRSE), and covariates for study site and time (i.e. trial number). The estimated working correlation was ̂ α = .83 .

> ∗∗

p < 0.01 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001 

performance increased with additional experience regardless of the level of compliance. The Conclusion Sensitivity Analysis revealed little sensitivity. Excluding two influential clusters increased the compliance coefficient from 2% to 3%, reducing uncertainty slightly. Dichotomizing score data caused the trial number covariate to lose statistical significance, a possible indicator of entanglement between compliance and experience. Compliance was still significant, increasing the odds of scoring above the median by a roughly 9:8 ratio per compliance event. Figure 4 shows that participants were able to achieve high scores without correspondingly high levels of compliance, yet greater compliance clearly correlated with greater performance. The estimated working correlation of ̂ α = .54 indicates some correlation between each participant’s own scoring NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 23 rates on the two trials. 

Table 3 

Exchangeable Poisson GEE estimates relating compliance count to performance score. 

Variable B eB CRSE 95% CI 

LL UL 

Constant 0.18 ˆμ = 1 0.29 -0.39 0.74 Site = VSU 0.25 +28% 0.30 -0.35 0.84 Trial Number 0.34 ∗∗ +41% 0.13 0.09 0.59 Compliances 0.02 ∗∗ +2% 0.01 0.01 0.03 

Note . k = 27 clusters (participants) of balanced size ni = 2 (trials per participant). We estimated the population-averaged relationship between the number of compliance events and the performance score using Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) with a Poisson link, exchangeable correlation structure, Morel-Bokossa-Neerchal (MBN) bias-corrected Cluster-Robust Standard Error (CRSE), and covariates for study site and time (i.e. trial number). The estimated working correlation was ̂ α = .54 .

> ∗∗

p < 0.01 

RQ3: Does programming performance predict subsequent specific trust in an AIDE? 

To investigate the connection in Figure 1 from performance back to specific trust, we estimated a Gaussian GEE regression that included all four timepoints of specific trust scores. This allowed for the estimation of within-cluster correlation according to the autoregressive (AR1) structure supported by both trust research Rodriguez Rodriguez et al., 2023 and our Scale Validation and Factor Analysis. To differentiate the effects of a new experience from performance during that experience, we used a time factor covariate for whether the trust ratings were given pre- or post-trial. We then crossed this NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 24 

Figure 4 

Boxplots of compliances at each possible score by trial. 

with score, keeping the product, but excluding the score-only predictor. Otherwise, the regression would nonsensically allow pre-trial trust to be predicted by a performance that had not yet happened (lookahead bias). Appropriately, the remaining product term goes to zero for pre-trial observations, with any systematic differences between pre- and post-trial ratings being captured by the time term. As shown in Figure 5, performance trended higher on trial two, so to avoid multicollinearity, no trial term (1 v. 2) was included. Table 4 shows the results of the coefficient Wald tests. There was a small but statistically significant positive relationship between performance and subsequent trust, with each additional performance point (0-8) increasing trust by a fraction of a trust point (0-10). The significant covariates indicate generally higher trust ratings at VSU and decreases in trust following new AIDE experiences while controlling for performance. The interpretation is that it takes a score of .46  

> .17

≈ 3 to maintain trust, with a lower or higher score changing trust accordingly. The Conclusion Sensitivity Analysis revealed minor sensitivity. Neither the removal of two influential clusters nor the inclusion of a trial number predictor had major impacts. Mean trust aggregation and performance dichotomization affected the significance of covariates but not the score term. The estimated working correlation of ̂ α = .77 supports the suspected autoregressive NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 25 dependence structure. 

Table 4 

Autoregressive gaussian GEE estimates relating performance score to post-trial trust. 

Variable B CRSE 95% CI 

LL UL 

Constant ˆμ = 6.32 ∗∗∗ 0.29 5.74 6.89 Site = VSU 1.17 ∗ 0.51 0.16 2.17 Post-Trial = True -0.46 ∗ 0.22 -0.88 -0.03 (Post-Trial = T) x Score 0.17 ∗∗∗ 0.05 0.07 0.26 

Note . k = 27 clusters (participants) of balanced size ni = 4 (before and after each of two trials per participant). We estimated the population-averaged relationship between the performance score and the computed factor score for post-trial trust using General-ized Estimating Equations (GEE) with a Gaussian link, autoregressive (AR-1) correlation structure, Morel-Bokossa-Neerchal (MBN) bias-corrected Cluster-Robust Standard Error (CRSE), and covariates for study site and whether a given trust score followed a new pro-gramming trial. Pre-trial trust ratings were included, so the interaction term estimated the effect of performance while counteracting lookahead bias. The estimated working corre-lation was ̂ α = .77 .

> ∗

p < 0.05 ; ∗∗∗ p < 0.001 

Discussion 

Overall, the results were inconclusive about a link from trust to AIDE compliance but did support relationships from compliance to performance and from performance to trust. Pre-interaction specific trust was not a significant predictor for AIDE compliance, but there was a positive relationship between compliance and performance. Performance was also positively correlated to post-interaction trust. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 26 

Figure 5 

Histogram of scores by trial. 

RQ1: Does specific trust in an AIDE predict subsequent compliance? 

We explored the relationship between pre-trial specific trust (1A and 2A in Figure 2) and the number of compliance events recorded during each trial. Here, we used trust as a predictor rather than a response in our GEE analysis. The negative sign of the estimated coefficient is opposite to the expectation from prior work Patton and Wickens, 2024, but the Wald test provided insufficient evidence to conclude whether the population-averaged rate of compliance events varied according to pre-trial specific trust. That is, the effect of trust on compliance was inconclusive. This outcome aligns to some recent findings that this effect, if present, is relatively small Patton and Wickens, 2024; Pharmer et al., 2025. The lack of alignment to earlier theory J. D. Lee and See, 2004 and prior studies Daly, 2002; Merritt and Ilgen, 2008; Wetzel, 2005 should be interpreted as a motivation for additional research rather than complete evidence that compliance is unrelated to trust. Our findings are perhaps best explained by the lack of risk associated with compliance in our study. Participants likely incurred very little marginal cost for each additional compliance. Prather et al. discussed this "no downside" Prather et al., 2024 phenomenon in a qualitative study of novices using Copilot for the first time without time pressure. It is also consistent with the theory of automation bias Mosier and Skitka, NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 27 1999. In our study, as easily as participants accepted code, they could evaluate it with pre-written tests and undo any changes they wished. Thus, a downside to compliance was the time cost of investing attention in Copilot’s suggestions. Even a participant with low trust in Copilot could conceivably accept its suggestions as long as the potential upside was worth the time cost. In a scenario like that reported by Ross et al. Ross et al., 2023 where the performance of code could not be assessed objectively, users might comply less due to the momentary uncertainty about the marginal value of accepting a suggestion. Fundamentally, trust in automation is characterized by uncertainty about its true reliability J. D. Lee and See, 2004, such that feedback mechanisms aligned with the user’s goals (e.g. the very same unit tests used to measure the performance they are striving toward) can downplay the role of trust in determining compliance behaviors. In J. Lee and Moray, 1992, participants’ strong tendency for self-reliance was only overcome when the operator’s trust in automation was very high compared to their self-confidence. They were not incentivized to risk the downsides of the automated machinery controllers performing poorly unless they did not think they could manage them manually. By comparison, our participants were incentivized to comply with the AIDE because, aside from time cost, they only stood to gain from its help. The inconclusive relationship between trust and compliance might also be explained by the limitations of our compliance measure. While the kind of compliance we measured might not relate to trust, some other kind might. As described in the Method section, we counted a compliance event whenever a user used a built-in compliance feature to accept code from Copilot. This included tab completions and clickable code insertion and editing tools. However, if participants complied with Copilot’s suggestions by manually typing them out or copy-and-pasting suggested code, our data collection system did not record this. Whereas "slow accepting" Prather et al., 2024 suggestions by typing them out character-by-character, which was not tracked, was an investment of time perhaps risky enough to be done on the basis of trust, the counted NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 28 compliances—those triggered by pressing the tab key or clicking a button—were presumably faster, less risky, and thus maybe less related to trust. Finally, compliance is easily reversible by discarding accepted code. Sabouri et al. Sabouri et al., 2025 observed 10 developers using AI assistance and found they kept only about half of the code they first accepted. Future work should investigate whether discounting compliances according to reversals affects the relationship to initial trust. 

RQ2: Does compliance predict performance when coding with an AIDE? 

We next explored the relationship between compliance and performance and found a significant positive relationship between compliance and performance scoring rate, with each additional compliance event (range 1 to 69) corresponding to about a 2% performance increase. Prior work suggested that this could be the case if the AIDE was sufficiently reliable to align with how much participants chose to use it Klingbeil et al., 2024; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; McGuirl and Sarter, 2006; Passi and Vorvoreanu, 2022. On such simple tasks, Copilot should have been highly reliable Finnie-Ansley et al., 2023. As discussed above, for reliability in this scenario to be sufficient, suggestions needed to contain enough useful insights to help participants produce correct code without costing too much time. Even as participants were expected to develop their own strategies during the experiment, those who used the AIDE more seemed to have benefited from doing so. This finding emphasizes the risk of automation disuse (under-reliance), which has often been eclipsed in existing literature by the risk of misuse (over-reliance) Kazemitabaar et al., 2024; Parasuraman and Riley, 1997; Prather et al., 2024; Ross et al., 2023; Vaithilingam et al., 2022. When someone underuses AI-generated content, the performance of the human-AI team can suffer as a result, regardless of the AI’s true reliability for the task at hand. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 29 

RQ3: Does programming performance predict subsequent specific trust in an AIDE? 

Prior work suggested that if participants had a sense of how they were performing with the AIDE, that their trust would follow suit Dzindolet et al., 2003; J. Lee and Moray, 1992; J. D. Lee and See, 2004; Merritt and Ilgen, 2008; Wetzel, 2005; Yang et al., 2023, and our results confirmed this expectation. Here, we used trust as a response rather than a predictor in our GEE analysis. We found a significant positive relationship between performance score and post-trial trust ratings while accounting for the autoregressive nature of trust. The practical significance of the observed effect is small at less than 1% of the trust scale’s range per additional point scored of eight. We know from our previous quantitative analysis that participants from UVA performed significantly better on their second trial with the AIDE compared to the first Gardella et al., 2024. While the GEE approach accounted for the correlation of participants’ trust ratings over time, a possible explanation for the relatively small observed effect of performance is the idea that trust has "inertia" Hu et al., 2019; J. Lee and Moray, 1992. With trust "inertia," participants who had trust-building experiences in trial one might not have fully adjusted their trust until later. Especially if participants felt their trust was betrayed in some way in trial one, either the accumulation of positive experiences from both trials or an inertia of positive experiences from trial one over time may have been needed before their trust would increase. 

Implications 

Understanding trust is useful for an engineer if: (a) it affects a metric of importance to their organization and (b) it can be changed through a feasible intervention. We focused on the former by assessing how a novice’s trust in an AIDE affects their compliance and performance on programming tasks. With the low-risk conditions in our study and the limitations of our compliance measure, we could not conclude whether participants’ pre-trial specific trust had any meaningful impact on NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 30 compliance. Therefore, when considering novices using AIDEs in performance-oriented task environments, our results did not suggest whether measures to manipulate trust will be useful in changing compliance behavior. However, compliance was positively associated with performance, so if maximal performance is the goal, training should focus on discouraging disuse in addition to discouraging misuse. Trust is a multifaceted attitude that may relate to other metrics of interest, such as workload and emotion, that were not studied here Daly, 2002; Merritt, 2011. Our findings indicate that novices trusted the AIDE more when it helped them perform well. To improve novices’ trust outside of training materials, engineers can also focus on the ongoing effort toward making AIDEs themselves more reliable and trustworthy Bolton, 2022; Horne, 2023. 

Limitations 

The primary limitations of our study were how we measured compliance and the design choice to give participants a performance feedback tool (unit tests). As described in the Method, we were only able to measure compliance events when participants used built-in compliance features, so there is a possibility that trust was related to copy-paste or typing initiated compliances in a way we were not able to observe. Furthermore, participants’ easy access to performance feedback limited the all-important influence of uncertainty on specific trust Hoff and Bashir, 2015; J. D. Lee and See, 2004. While sample size and generalizability are always challenges, we were able to support some theories about trust derived from prior human factors research. The higher trust ratings and lower compliance rates at VSU compared to UVA emphasize the need for caution when generalizing over time and into varied contexts. The limited sample size split between UVA and VSU and the inconsistencies in software, training, etc. should motivate extreme caution when interpreting differences across sites. Because we did not measure learning, we cannot make claims regarding the role of trust in effective learning, but we encourage future work in this area. Finally, given practitioners may intend to use this work to inform trust-targeted interventions, we should emphasize that our findings NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 31 rely only on natural variations in trust that happen during AIDE interactions. By contrast, when trust is intentionally manipulated, it may vary to a greater extent, uncovering an otherwise hidden relationship with compliance Biros et al., 2003; Spain, 2009. 

Conclusion 

Conventional wisdom advises placing appropriate levels of trust in automation to avoid misuse or disuse. There is a contextually varied gap between what automation can do and whether humans think they can rely on it. In theory, this determines whether they do rely on it, creating a feedback loop J. D. Lee and See, 2004. We assessed this theory in the context of novice programmers using GitHub Copilot under time pressure. We measured specific trust in Copilot, compliance to its suggestions, and programming performance to test the validity of theory in our context. We failed to find a conclusive link from compliance to performance. However, compliance and performance were positively associated, and higher performance led to increased trust. These findings indicate that trust is related to performance and compliance but that manipulating trust to improve the performance of hybrid intelligence teams is a questionable approach that warrants further study. Practitioners should seek out more direct interventions for their metrics of interest and continue to make AIDEs more trustworthy programming companions. 

Key Points 

• 27 novice programmers at two research sites programmed with AI (GitHub Copilot) under time pressure for two 20-minute trials. • Trust in GitHub Copilot was measured four times with an adaptation of the Muir scale, performance was measured based on number of tasks completed per trial, and compliance was measured when Copilot’s built-in compliance features were used. • Pre-trial trust failed to predict measures of compliance. • Performance was positively associated with AI compliance and post-trial trust. NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 32 

References 

Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior : Illustration of applied social research . Prentice-Hall. Amoozadeh, M., Daniels, D., Nam, D., Kumar, A., Chen, S., Hilton, M., Srinivasa Ragavan, S., & Alipour, M. A. (2024). Trust in Generative AI among Students: An exploratory study. Proceedings of the 55th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 , 67–73. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626252.3630842 Biros, D. P., Fields, G., & Gunsch, G. (2003). The effect of external safeguards on human-information system trust in an information warfare environment. 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2003. Proceedings of the , 10–pp. Retrieved October 25, 2024, from https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/1173894/ Bolton, M. L. (2022). Trust is not a virtue: Why we should not trust trust [Publisher: SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA]. Ergonomics in Design ,10648046221130171. Brown, A., D’Angelo, S., Murillo, A., Jaspan, C., & Green, C. (2024). Identifying the Factors That Influence Trust in AI Code Completion. Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Conference on AI-Powered Software , 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/3664646.3664757 Byrne, B. M., & Byrne, B. M. (2006, February). Structural Equation Modeling With EQS: Basic Concepts, Applications, and Programming, Second Edition (2nd ed.). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203726532 Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H. P. d. O., Kaplan, J., Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N., & Brockman, G. (2021). Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 33 Cook, R. D. (1977). Detection of Influential Observation in Linear Regression. 

Technometrics , 19 (1), 15–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1977.10489493 Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. 

Psychometrika , 16 (3), 297–334. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02310555 Daly, M. (2002, March). Task Load and Automation Use in an Uncertain Environment 

[Doctoral dissertation]. https://scholar.afit.edu/etd/4394 Dixon, S. R., Wickens, C. D., & McCarley, J. S. (2007). On the Independence of Compliance and Reliance: Are Automation False Alarms Worse Than Misses? 

Human Factors , 49 (4), 564–572. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872007X215656 Dzindolet, M. T., Peterson, S. A., Pomranky, R. A., Pierce, L. G., & Beck, H. P. (2003). The role of trust in automation reliance. International journal of human-computer studies , 58 (6), 697–718. Retrieved October 24, 2024, from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1071581903000387 Fan, G., Liu, D., Zhang, R., & Pan, L. (2025). The impact of AI-assisted pair programming on student motivation, programming anxiety, collaborative learning, and programming performance: A comparative study with traditional pair programming and individual approaches. International Journal of STEM Education , 12 (1), 16. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-025-00537-3 Finnie-Ansley, J., Denny, P., Luxton-Reilly, A., Santos, E. A., Prather, J., & Becker, B. A. (2023). My AI Wants to Know if This Will Be on the Exam: Testing OpenAI’s Codex on CS2 Programming Exercises. Proceedings of the 25th Australasian Computing Education Conference , 97–104. https://doi.org/10.1145/3576123.3576134 Gardella, N., Pettit, R., & Riggs, S. L. (2024). Performance, Workload, Emotion, and Self-Efficacy of Novice Programmers Using AI Code Generation. Proceedings of the 2024 on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education V. 1 ,290–296. https://doi.org/10.1145/3649217.3653615 NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 34 Hoff, K. A., & Bashir, M. (2015). Trust in Automation: Integrating Empirical Evidence on Factors That Influence Trust. Human Factors , 57 (3), 407–434. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720814547570 Højsgaard, S., Halekoh, U., & Yan, J. (2006). The R package geepack for generalized estimating equations. Journal of statistical software , 15 , 1–11. Retrieved January 29, 2026, from https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v015i02 Horne, D. (2023). PwnPilot: Reflections on Trusting Trust in the Age of Large Language Models and AI Code Assistants. 2023 Congress in Computer Science, Computer Engineering, & Applied Computing (CSCE) , 2457–2464. Retrieved October 14, 2024, from https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10487488/ Hu, W.-L., Akash, K., Reid, T., & Jain, N. (2019). Computational Modeling of the Dynamics of Human Trust During Human–Machine Interactions. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems , 49 (6), 485–497. https://doi.org/10.1109/THMS.2018.2874188 Ihaka, R., & Gentleman, R. (1996). R: A Language for Data Analysis and Graphics. 

Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 5(3), 299–314. https://doi.org/10.1080/10618600.1996.10474713 Investigating and Designing for Trust in AI-powered Code Generation Tools | Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. (n.d.). Retrieved January 30, 2026, from https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3630106.3658984 Jackson, D. L., Gillaspy Jr, J. A., & Purc-Stephenson, R. (2009). Reporting practices in confirmatory factor analysis: An overview and some recommendations. 

Psychological methods , 14 (1), 6. Retrieved November 6, 2024, from https://psycnet.apa.org/fulltext/2009-02702-005.html NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 35 Jayagopal, D., Lubin, J., & Chasins, S. E. (2022). Exploring the learnability of program synthesizers by novice programmers. Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , 1–15. Kazemitabaar, M., Chow, J., Ma, C. K. T., Ericson, B. J., Weintrop, D., & Grossman, T. (2023). Studying the effect of AI Code Generators on Supporting Novice Learners in Introductory Programming. Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580919 Kazemitabaar, M., Hou, X., Henley, A., Ericson, B. J., Weintrop, D., & Grossman, T. (2024). How Novices Use LLM-based Code Generators to Solve CS1 Coding Tasks in a Self-Paced Learning Environment. Proceedings of the 23rd Koli Calling International Conference on Computing Education Research , 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3631802.3631806 Klingbeil, A., Grützner, C., & Schreck, P. (2024). Trust and reliance on AI—An experimental study on the extent and costs of overreliance on AI. Computers in Human Behavior , 160 , 108352. Retrieved October 16, 2024, from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0747563224002206 Kramer, R. M. (1999). TRUST AND DISTRUST IN ORGANIZATIONS: Emerging Perspectives, Enduring Questions. Annual Review of Psychology , 50 (1), 569–598. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.50.1.569 Lee, J., & Moray, N. (1992). Trust, control strategies and allocation of function in human-machine systems. Ergonomics , 35 (10), 1243–1270. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139208967392 Lee, J. D., & See, K. A. (2004). Trust in automation: Designing for appropriate reliance [Publisher: SAGE Publications Sage UK: London, England]. Human factors ,

46 (1), 50–80. Liang, K.-Y., & Zeger, S. L. (1986). Longitudinal Data Analysis Using Generalized Linear Models. Biometrika , 73 (1), 13–22. https://doi.org/10.2307/2336267 NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 36 Lindsey, J., Gurnee, W., Ameisen, E., Chen, B., Pearce, A., Turner, N. L., Citro, C., Abrahams, D., Carter, S., Hosmer, B., Marcus, J., Sklar, M., Templeton, A., Bricken, T., McDougall, C., Cunningham, H., Henighan, T., Jermyn, A., Jones, A., . . . Batson, J. (2025). On the Biology of a Large Language Model. Transformer Circuits Thread .https://transformer-circuits.pub/2025/attribution-graphs/biology.html Marsh, S., & Dibben, M. R. (2003). The role of trust in information science and technology. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (ARIST) , 37 ,465–98. Retrieved April 18, 2025, from https://www.learntechlib.org/p/96318/ Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An Integrative Model of Organizational Trust. The Academy of Management Review , 20 (3), 709–734. https://doi.org/10.2307/258792 McCracken, M., Almstrum, V., Diaz, D., Guzdial, M., Hagan, D., Kolikant, Y. B.-D., Laxer, C., Thomas, L., Utting, I., & Wilusz, T. (2001). A multi-national, multi-institutional study of assessment of programming skills of first-year CS students. Working group reports from ITiCSE on Innovation and technology in computer science education , 125–180. https://doi.org/10.1145/572133.572137 McGuirl, J. M., & Sarter, N. B. (2006). Supporting Trust Calibration and the Effective Use of Decision Aids by Presenting Dynamic System Confidence Information. Human Factors , 48 (4), 656–665. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872006779166334 McKnight, D., & Chervany, N. (2000). What is Trust? A Conceptual Analysis and an Interdisciplinary Model. AMCIS 2000 Proceedings .https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2000/382 McNeish, D., & Stapleton, L. M. (2016). Modeling Clustered Data with Very Few Clusters. 

Multivariate Behavioral Research , 51 (4), 495–518. https://doi.org/10.1080/00273171.2016.1167008 NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 37 McNeish, D. M. (2014). Modeling sparsely clustered data: Design-based, model-based, and single-level methods. Psychological Methods , 19 (4), 552–563. https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000024 Merritt, S. M. (2011). Affective Processes in Human–Automation Interactions. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , 53 (4), 356–370. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720811411912 Merritt, S. M., & Ilgen, D. R. (2008). Not all trust is created equal: Dispositional and history-based trust in human-automation interactions [Number: 2 Publisher: SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA]. Human factors , 50 (2), 194–210. Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information. [Number: 2]. Psychological Review , 63 (2), 81–97. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0043158 Morel, J., Bokossa, M., & Neerchal, N. (2003). Small Sample Correction for the Variance of GEE Estimators [_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/bimj.200390021]. Biometrical Journal , 45 (4), 395–409. https://doi.org/10.1002/bimj.200390021 Mosier, K. L., & Skitka, L. J. (1999). Automation Use and Automation Bias. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , 43 (3), 344–348. https://doi.org/10.1177/154193129904300346 Muir, B. M. (1989). Operators’ trust in and use of automatic controllers in a supervisory process control task [Ph.D.]. University of Toronto (Canada). Retrieved June 29, 2023, from https://www.proquest.com/pqdtglobal/docview/303794539/citation/ EA1C186F755147DBPQ/1 Muir, B. M., & Moray, N. (1996). Trust in automation. Part II. Experimental studies of trust and human intervention in a process control simulation. Ergonomics , 39 (3), 429–460. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139608964474 NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 38 Parasuraman, R., & Riley, V. (1997). Humans and Automation: Use, Misuse, Disuse, Abuse. Human Factors , 39 (2), 230–253. https://doi.org/10.1518/001872097778543886 Passi, S., & Vorvoreanu, M. (2022). Overreliance on AI literature review. Microsoft Research . Retrieved October 14, 2024, from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/2022/06/Aether-Overreliance-on-AI-Review-Final-6.21.22.pdf Patton, C. E., & Wickens, C. D. (2024). The relationship of trust and dependence. 

Ergonomics , 67 (11), 1535–1552. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2024.2342436 Pearce, H., Ahmad, B., Tan, B., Dolan-Gavitt, B., & Karri, R. (2022). Asleep at the keyboard? assessing the security of github copilot’s code contributions. 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 754–768. Pearson, K., & Galton, F. (1997). VII. Note on regression and inheritance in the case of two parents. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London , 58 (347-352), 240–242. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspl.1895.0041 Pedroza, C., & Truong, V. T. T. (2017). Estimating relative risks in multicenter studies with a small number of centers — which methods to use? A simulation study. Trials ,

18 (1), 512. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-017-2248-1 Perry, N., Srivastava, M., Kumar, D., & Boneh, D. (2023). Do Users Write More Insecure Code with AI Assistants? Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , 2785–2799. https://doi.org/10.1145/3576915.3623157 Pharmer, R. L., Wickens, C. D., & Clegg, B. A. (2025). Transparent systems, opaque results: A study on automation compliance and task performance. Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications , 10 (1), 8. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41235-025-00619-4 NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 39 Prather, J., Reeves, B. N., Denny, P., Becker, B. A., Leinonen, J., Luxton-Reilly, A., Powell, G., Finnie-Ansley, J., & Santos, E. A. (2024). “It’s Weird That it Knows What I Want”: Usability and Interactions with Copilot for Novice Programmers. 

ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction , 31 (1), 1–31. https://doi.org/10.1145/3617367 Rhemtulla, M., Brosseau-Liard, P. É., & Savalei, V. (2012). When can categorical variables be treated as continuous? A comparison of robust continuous and categorical SEM estimation methods under suboptimal conditions. Psychological methods , 17 (3), 354. Retrieved January 28, 2026, from https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2012-18631-001 Rodriguez Rodriguez, L., Bustamante Orellana, C. E., Chiou, E. K., Huang, L., Cooke, N., & Kang, Y. (2023). A review of mathematical models of human trust in automation. Frontiers in Neuroergonomics , 4, 1171403. Retrieved January 30, 2026, from https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroergonomics/articles/10.3389/ fnrgo.2023.1171403/full Ross, S. I., Martinez, F., Houde, S., Muller, M., & Weisz, J. D. (2023). The Programmer’s Assistant: Conversational Interaction with a Large Language Model for Software Development. Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 491–514. https://doi.org/10.1145/3581641.3584037 Rosseel, Y. (2012). Lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. Journal of statistical software , 48 , 1–36. Retrieved November 18, 2024, from https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v048i02 Sabouri, S., Eibl, P., Zhou, X., Ziyadi, M., Medvidovic, N., Lindemann, L., & Chattopadhyay, S. (2025). Trust Dynamics in AI-Assisted Development: Definitions, Factors, and Implications [ISSN: 1558-1225]. 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) , 1678–1690. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00199 NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 40 Sadowski, C., & Zimmermann, T. (2019). Rethinking productivity in software engineering .Springer Nature. Retrieved September 9, 2024, from https://library.oapen.org/handle/20.500.12657/22839 Satorra, A., & Bentler, P. M. (2001). A scaled difference chi-square test statistic for moment structure analysis. Psychometrika , 66 (4), 507–514. Retrieved February 12, 2025, from https://idp.springer.com/authorize/casa?redirect_uri=https://link. springer.com/article/10.1007/bf02296192&casa_token=u9u5q4_uXUkAAAAA: EVVL_ANPhHHleRCeBtfDARzrPJosFphuy3vIahZxBWiYYthr3yTPPkYHRHIFyio_ 0kKLcxMKGL8q5ulmyw Shah, A., Chernova, A., Tomson, E., Porter, L., Griswold, W. G., & Soosai Raj, A. G. (2025). Students’ Use of GitHub Copilot for Working with Large Code Bases. 

Proceedings of the 56th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1 , 1050–1056. https://doi.org/10.1145/3641554.3701800 Spain, R. D. (2009). The effects of automation expertise, system confidence, and image quality on trust, compliance, and performance. Retrieved October 25, 2024, from https://digitalcommons.odu.edu/psychology_etds/120/ Vaithilingam, P., Zhang, T., & Glassman, E. L. (2022). Expectation vs. Experience: Evaluating the Usability of Code Generation Tools Powered by Large Language Models. Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519665 Vanegas, L. H., Rondon, L. M., & Paula, G. A. (2023). Generalized Estimating Equations using the new R package glmtoolbox. The R Journal , 15 (2), 105–133. Wang, M. (2015). Geesmv: Modified Variance Estimators for Generalized Estimating Equations. https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/geesmv/index.html Weisz, J. D., Michael Muller, Michael Muller, Muller, M., Houde, S., Richards, J. T., Ross, S. I., Martinez, F., Agarwal, M., & Talamadupula, K. (2021). Perfection Not NOVICE TRUST IN AI CODE GENERATION 41 Required? Human-AI Partnerships in Code Translation [MAG ID: 3154248444], 402–412. https://doi.org/10.1145/3397481.3450656 Wetzel, J. M. (2005). Driver trust, annoyance, and compliance for an automated calendar system [Ph.D.]. Central Michigan University. Retrieved October 25, 2024, from https: //www.proquest.com/docview/305363652/abstract/C9A2EE5257934DCBPQ/1 Yang, X. J., Schemanske, C., & Searle, C. (2023). Toward Quantifying Trust Dynamics: How People Adjust Their Trust After Moment-to-Moment Interaction With Automation. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , 65 (5), 862–878. https://doi.org/10.1177/00187208211034716 

Biographies Nicholas Gardella 

Nicholas received the Master of Engineering degree in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, VA, USA in 2023. He expects to receive the Ph.D. degree in Systems Engineering from the University of Virginia in 2026. He passed his dissertation defense and is currently a Ph.D. Candidate in the Department of Systems and Information Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. 

Matthew L. Bolton 

Matthew received the Ph.D. degree from the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, VA, USA in 2010. He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Systems and Information Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. 

Sara L. Riggs 

Sara received the Ph.D. degree in Industrial and Operations Engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 2014. She is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Systems and Information Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.