Title: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is The Solution

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02640v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 02:08:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

Ruta Binkyte * 1 Ivaxi Sheth * 1 Zhijing Jin 2 3 4 Mohammad Havaei 5 Bernhard Schölkopf 2 Mario Fritz 1

# Abstract 

As artificial intelligence (AI), including machine learning (ML) models and foundation models (FMs), are increasingly deployed in high-stakes domains, ensuring their trustworthiness has be-come a central challenge. However, the core trust-worthy AI objectives, such as fairness, robustness, privacy, and explainability, are hard to achieve simultaneously, especially while preserving util-ity. This position paper argues that causality is necessary to understand and balance trade-offs in performance and multiple objectives of trustworthy AI. We ground our arguments in re-interpreting trustworthy AI trade-offs as incom-patible invariance requirements under different changes to the data-generating process. We then illustrate that causality provides a unifying frame-work for understanding how trade-offs in trust-worthy AI arise, and how they can be softened or resolved through selective invariance. This perspective applies to both classical ML models and large-scale FMs. Our paper discusses how causal assumptions may be applied explicitly or implicitly in modern large-scale systems. Finally, we outline open challenges and opportunities for using causality to build both trustworthy and high-performing AI. 

# 1. Introduction 

Machine learning (ML) models have driven remarkable ad-vances in natural language processing, computer vision, and decision-making, enabling large-scale deployment in do-mains such as healthcare, finance, education, and social media. More recently, foundation models (FMs), including large language models (LLMs) and vision language mod-

> 1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security 2Max Planck Institute for Intelligent, Tübingen 3ETH Zürich 4University of Toronto 5Google Research. Correspondence to: Ruta Binkyte <ruta.binkyte@gmail.com>. 

Preprint. May 5, 2026. 

els (VLMs), have demonstrated unprecedented generality across tasks (Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Rad-ford et al., 2023). Given their influence, ensuring ethical and trustworthy ML and FM systems has become a global priority. Many international regulations and frameworks (European Commission, 2021) seek to establish guidelines for AI that would avoid harmful social impact. In this work, we focus on four trustworthy dimensions - fairness, explain-ability, robustness, and privacy protection - as well as their relationship with model performance. 

Trade-offs in trustworthy AI. The objectives in trustwor-thy AI 1 are rarely independent. Improving one aspect often comes at the expense of another, or model performance. For example, privacy noise added to protect data reduces model accuracy (Xu et al., 2017; Carvalho et al., 2023). Similarly, achieving fairness frequently requires sacrificing predic-tive performance or resolving conflicts between competing fairness notions, such as demographic parity and equalized odds (Friedler et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2020). Performance is also frequently traded off against explainability , as complex deep models excel in accuracy but are not comprehensible by humans (Crook et al., 2023). Even fairness and privacy can conflict as the loss in performance disproportionately hurts sensitive groups (Pujol et al., 2020). Similarly, overfit-ting on spurious signals in the data gives accuracy at the cost of robustness (Tsipras et al., 2018). However, much of the machine learning research and development has historically prioritized improving predictive accuracy and performance or treated these trade-offs as empirical side effects. 

Causality and trustworthy AI. Unlike correlation-based approaches, causal models represent the mechanisms that produce data, enabling selective invariance: they allow models to be invariant to spurious pathways while remaining sensitive to stable, causally meaningful signals. Causal methods have already shown promise in auditing and mitigating unfairness (Kim et al., 2021; Kilbertus et al., 2017; Loftus et al., 2018) and in improving robustness under distribution shift (Schölkopf et al., 2021). In addition, 

> 1

Throughout the paper, we use AI as an umbrella term for learning-based models, including both classical machine learning models and foundation models. 

1 

> arXiv:2605.02640v1 [cs.AI] 4 May 2026 Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution
> Figure 1. Causal resolution to trade-offs in trustworthy AI. See Appendix A for the details.

recent theoretical results show that under certain conditions robustness implies causality (Richens & Everitt, 2024). While the connection between causality and privacy is still less explored, early work indicates that causal structure can improve privacy-utility trade-offs (Tschantz et al., 2020; Tople et al., 2020; Binkyte et al., 2024). Finally, explainability is inherently aligned with causality, as expla-nations are naturally expressed in terms of interventions and counterfactuals. However, despite recognition of causal solutions to individual challenges of trustworthy AI (Liu et al., 2023; Rawal et al., 2025; Ganguly et al., 2023), its role in reconciling the trade-offs between multiple goals and model performance remains underexplored. 

Position. In this paper, we argue that the trade-offs in trust-worthy AI are not incidental, but arise from incompatible invariance requirements imposed by individual trustworthy AI objectives . Robustness demands stability under distri-butional shifts; fairness demands stability when protected attributes or group membership change; privacy demands stability when individual data points are added or removed; and explainability demands stable attribution of changes un-der feasible actions. At their core, trustworthy AI objectives can be reformulated as demands that a model’s behavior re-mains stable under changes. When different trust objectives demand stability under different and potentially conflict-ing sets of changes, trade-offs become unavoidable. For instance, accuracy under the observational distribution may rely on correlations that are unstable under interventions on the sensitive attributes or environmental variables, while fairness and robustness explicitly demand invariance to such interventions. Based on the above, we position causality as a unifying framework for understanding how trade-offs in trustworthy AI arise, and how they can be softened or resolved. When causality is necessary? Not all invariance require-ments immediately necessitate causal reasoning. If a single trust objective is considered in isolation and the admissible changes are limited, purely statistical methods may suffice to enforce invariance. For example, a classifier can be trained to satisfy independence between the sensitive attribute and the outcome on a fixed dataset, or to be robust to a specific, observed form of covariate shift, without any explicit causal model. However, this breaks down as soon as additional ob-jectives or accuracy constraints are imposed. When multiple invariances must hold simultaneously, it becomes neces-sary to distinguish which dependencies are spurious and which reflect stable mechanisms. This distinction cannot, in general, be made from observational data alone. Impor-tantly, this necessity is agnostic to model class. It applies equally to classical machine learning models and to large-scale foundation models. The distinction lies not in whether causal reasoning is needed, but in how causal assumptions are encoded and operationalized at scale. 

How causality resolves the trade-offs in trustworthy AI? 

Causal reasoning is therefore required, not merely to enforce a single constraint, but to reason about which invariances can coexist, which must conflict, and how trade-offs can be selectively navigated. More precisely, causality allows: (i) Selective invariance through structural constraints. 

Causal graph clarifies pathways that are subject to invari-ance requirements, allowing constraints to be enforced se-lectively rather than uniformly. This enables the suppression of normatively unacceptable effects (e.g., direct or proxy discrimination) while preserving causally justified signal, which is impossible under purely associational criteria. (ii) Shift focus from observational accuracy to interventional validity. Causal reasoning distinguishes correlations that merely predict outcomes from causal mechanisms and re-duces overfitting to spurious correlations. This resolves the 2Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

tension between predictive accuracy and trustworthy objec-tives by shifting the optimization target from performance under the observational distribution to correctness under interventions. We provide a schematic illustration of causal approach to trustworthy AI in Figure 1. 

Paper map and contributions. We reinterpret trustwor-thy AI literature to illustrate how trustworthy AI objectives translate into competing invariance requirements under in-terventions. We then show how causal structure enables principled resolution of these conflicts and discuss how causality can be encoded in both classical ML systems and foundation models. We discuss the conceptual and practical limitations of resolving trustworthy AI trade-offs using a causal approach. Finally, we draw future directions and call for actions necessary to overcome these limitations. Our contributions are the following: 1.) We reinterpret major trade-offs in trustworthy AI through a conflicting invariance requirements lens; 2.) We formulate when causal reasoning is necessary and how it resolves or softens trade-offs in trustworthy AI. 

# 2. Background and Preliminaries 

We introduce the core dimensions of trustworthy AI, empha-sizing formal characterizations that are relevant for under-standing trade-offs and motivating causal reasoning. 

2.1. Interventions and Invariance 

Let D denote the observational data distribution over 

(X, Y ), and let {D I }I∈I denotes a family of distributions obtained by applying a set of admissible changes I to the data-generating process. These changes may correspond to modifications of inputs, environments, data collection procedures, population characteristics, or other aspects of the data-generating process. A model is said to satisfy an invariance requirement with respect to a set of admissible changes I if its behavior or performance remains stable across the corresponding distributions {D I }I∈I .

2.2. Trustworthy ML Objectives 

We now instantiate the invariance principle defined above for common trust dimensions. Consider a supervised learning setting with observed features X ∈ X , a target variable 

Y ∈ Y , and a learned predictor f : X → ˆY. Each trust objective corresponds to requiring f to satisfy an invariance requirement with respect to a specific class of admissible changes. 

Fairness (invariance to protected attributes). Let 

A ∈ A denote a sensitive or protected attribute. Fairness requires that the behavior of f remain invariant under admissible changes to A, either in distribution (e.g., Demographic parity) or conditional on Y (e.g., Equalized odds). 

Privacy (invariance to data inclusion). Let D denote a training dataset and let D′ be a neighboring dataset that differs from D in a single individual. Privacy requires that the behavior of a randomized mechanism M remain approximately invariant under the admissible change 

D → D′. In other words, the output distribution of M (D)

should be stable with respect to the inclusion, removal, or modification of any single data point. 

Robustness (invariance to distribution shifts). Let 

{D e}e∈E denote a family of distributions indexed by environments e. Robustness requires that the behavior or performance of a model remain invariant across these environments. Formally, this is captured by bounded loss across the family {D e}e∈E , where each e may correspond to a shift in population, measurement process, or data-generating mechanism. 

Explainability (selective invariance under changes). Let 

Irel and Iirr denote sets of admissible relevant and irrelevant changes to the input or context, respectively. Explainability concerns the ability to understand and justify a model’s pre-dictions through how they respond to these changes. From the invariance perspective, f (X) should be invariant under changes in Iirr , and responsive under changes in Irel in a predictable and meaningful way. This definition equally applies to modern interpretability methods. 

2.3. Accuracy 

Accuracy measures predictive performance under the ob-servational distribution D, typically via the expected loss 

E(X,Y )∼D [ℓ(f (X), Y )] . In practice, accuracy often con-flicts with invariance-based trust requirements, giving rise to the trade-offs studied in this work. 

2.4. Interventional Accuracy 

Interventional accuracy measures predictive performance under the interventional distribution DI , and can be ex-pressed as the expected loss E(X,Y )∼D I [ℓ(f (X), Y )] . In contrast to observational accuracy, which rewards correla-tions that hold in the training environment, interventional accuracy prioritizes predictors whose performance is stable across the family of interventions. 3Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

2.5. Causality 

Purely associational learning methods operate on the ob-servational distribution D and are sufficient for answering queries of the form P (Y | X). However, many trust-worthy ML objectives require reasoning about how pre-dictions would change under hypothetical or interventional modifications to the data-generating process. To formal-ize such changes, we adopt Pearl’s structural causal frame-work (Pearl, 2009). Central to Pearl’s framework, an SCM consists of a set of endogenous variables V , exogenous variables U , and structural equations F that determine how each variable in 

V is generated from its parents and noise. This structure is summarized by a causal graph G = ( V, E), which is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where E is a set of edges connecting the nodes V .Given a causal graph G, a causal path from a variable X

to a variable Y is any directed sequence of edges in G that begins at X and ends at Y . Causal paths characterize how the effect of one variable on another is transmitted through intermediate variables, and provide a decomposition of the total causal effect into distinct mechanistic components. 

# 3. Trade-offs as Invariance Conflicts 

In this section, we build on concrete examples and rein-terpret well-known results from the literature to show that many trade-offs in trustworthy AI arise from fundamentally incompatible invariance requirements imposed by different objectives. We then highlight how causal reasoning pro-vides a principled way to diagnose and soften or resolve these conflicts. 

3.1. Fairness–Accuracy Trade-off Statistical origin of the trade-off. Predictive accuracy under the observational distribution D often relies on corre-lations between features and sensitive attributes A. When these correlations are predictive, suppressing them to satisfy fairness constraints can reduce accuracy. This phenomenon is well documented across fairness-aware ML learning meth-ods (Zliobaite, 2015; Zhao & Gordon, 2022). Similarly, in generative models, careless fairness interventions can back-fire; for instance, efforts to enhance diversity have led to his-torically inaccurate outputs, as seen in critiques of Google’s Gemini (Vincent, 2024). 

Invariance conflict. Many fairness notions can be ex-pressed as invariance requirements under interventions on 

A. For instance, Demographic parity can be interpreted as requiring invariance of the decision distribution f (X) for all values of A. In contrast, maximizing accuracy under D

encourages sensitivity to any predictive signal, including those downstream of A.This creates a conflict between fairness and accuracy goals. Without distinguishing normatively unacceptable pathways from causally justified ones, these requirements are incom-patible. 

Causal resolution. Causal models distinguish between admissible and inadmissible causal pathways from A to 

Y (Chiappa, 2019). By explicitly modeling the data-generating process, causal reasoning enables selective in-variance: suppressing only those paths deemed unfair (e.g., direct or proxy discrimination), while preserving legitimate causal effects (e.g., through explaining variables, such as gender dependent disease risks). This logic applies across model classes. In classical ML, causal constraints operate on input features and represen-tations. In foundation models, the same causal pathways are encoded implicitly in embeddings, attention patterns, or generation dynamics. Causal interventions, such as coun-terfactual data augmentation, causal disentanglement, or SCM-based regularization, can mitigate biased generative behavior while preserving task-relevant predictive struc-ture (Zhou et al., 2023; Madhavan et al., 2023). Entity substitutions can selectively block unfair or spurious causal paths while preserving task-relevant information, illustrat-ing how causal intervention softens the fairness-accuracy trade-off (Wang et al., 2023). 

3.2. Privacy–Utility (and Attribution) Statistical origin of the trade-off. Privacy-preserving mechanisms such as differential privacy reduce the influ-ence of individual data points or sensitive attributes on model outputs by introducing privacy noise. While this limits information leakage, it also degrades utility by attenu-ating informative signals. In large-scale generative models, privacy risks additionally arise through memorization and indirect reproduction of personally identifiable information, further intensifying the tension between privacy and model usefulness (Xu et al., 2017). 

Invariance conflict. Privacy requires invariance to interventions on private or individual-level variables, such that small changes to sensitive information do not substantially affect outputs. Utility, in contrast, requires sen-sitivity to variables and pathways that encode task-relevant information. In foundation models, this conflict extends to attribution: models must be insensitive to whether a specific individual’s data is present in the training set, while remaining sensitive to generalizable patterns. 4Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

Causal resolution. Causal models mitigate the privacy– utility trade-off by reducing reliance on spurious corre-lations that lead to overfitting and memorization, which are primary drivers of re-identification and membership in-ference attacks. By aligning learning with stable causal mechanisms, such models are less susceptible to privacy attacks that exploit dataset-specific artifacts. In particular, Tople et al. (Tople et al., 2020) show that causal models pro-vide stronger defenses against membership inference attacks while requiring a smaller privacy budget ϵ under differential privacy, thereby achieving comparable privacy guarantees with less degradation in utility. In addition, explicitly modeling how private attributes prop-agate through the system, causal structure makes it possible to suppress only privacy-sensitive effects while preserving non- sensitive causal relationships. We highlight this form of targeted causal obfuscation as a promising design di-rection that can lower the impact of data obfuscation on performance. Similarly, in foundation models, causal audit-ing can enable principled attribution by distinguishing data memorization from incidental stylistic similarity (Sharkey et al., 2024). 

3.3. Robustness–Accuracy Statistical origin of the trade-off. High predictive ac-curacy under a fixed training distribution often relies on shortcut correlations that are specific to that environment. When deployment conditions change, these correlations may break, leading to degraded performance. Methods that improve robustness by discouraging such shortcuts often reduce in-distribution accuracy. 

Invariance conflict. Robustness requires invariance across a family of environments, which can be formalized as distributions related by interventions on latent or observed environmental variables. Accuracy under the observational distribution, however, rewards sensitivity to all predictive correlations, including those that are unstable under such interventions. 

Causal resolution. Causal reasoning resolves this con-flict by distinguishing invariant causal mechanisms from spurious associations. Features that are causal parents of the target remain predictive under interventions, while non-causal shortcuts do not. In this way, causal reasoning shifts focus to interventional accuracy and provides a principled way to prioritize stable features. In foundation models, shortcut correlations are often en-coded implicitly in learned representations. Causal in-variance and regularization techniques can reduce reliance on unstable patterns while preserving task-relevant struc-ture (Zhou et al., 2023). Moreover, recent theoretical results show that agents robust across environments must implicitly learn causal world models ( ?), further highlighting the link between robustness and causality. 

3.4. Explainability–Performance Statistical origin of the trade-off. Highly expressive models often achieve strong performance by exploiting com-plex, distributed correlations that are difficult for humans to interpret. As a result, improvements in predictive ca-pability frequently come at the cost of interpretability and explainability (London, 2019; van der Veer et al., 2021). 

Invariance conflict. Explainability requires stability of model behavior under interventions on semantically mean-ingful variables, enabling counterfactual reasoning about why a prediction was made. Performance-oriented models, in contrast, may rely on opaque correlations that change unpredictably under such interventions. 

Causal resolution. Causal models address this tension by explicitly representing how inputs influence outputs through causal mechanisms, enabling counterfactual explanations and actionable recourse (Wachter et al., 2017). In foundation models, causal structure can be probed within internal components such as embeddings, attention heads, and logits. Methods for causal path analysis and intervention-based probing enable step-by-step explanations of generative behavior (Bagheri et al., 2024; Conmy et al., 2023). In addition, the causal approach in mechanistic inter-pretability provides a principled way to faithfully translate complex generative processes to human-understandable ab-stractions (Geiger et al., 2025). 

3.5. Towards Multi-Objective Trade-Off Resolution Origins of multi-objective trade-offs. The preceding sec-tions show that many trade-offs between fairness, privacy, robustness, and accuracy or model performance arise when invariance constraints are enforced uniformly over all statis-tical dependencies. In addition, privacy mechanisms often worsen fairness for minority groups. When obfuscation is applied uniformly, the signal-to-noise ratio of underrep-resented populations collapses first, because their causal pathways are already weakly supported by data. This cre-ates a fairness-privacy trade-off. Similarly, data obfuscation obscures the relationships between predictive variables and the outcome, thus creating a privacy-explainability trade-off. 

Towards causal resolution. We argue that the causal ap-proach leads to the improvement of multi-objective trade-offs in trustworthy AI, or, in other words, allows to improve multiple dimensions simultaneously. First, by decomposing total effects into causal pathways, causal models allow in-5Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

variance requirements to be targeted rather than global. For example, privacy can be enforced only on paths that transmit individual identifying information. Second, causal models are inherently explainable, robust, and require less privacy noise for preventing leakage of sensitive information (Tople et al., 2020). As a result, they should better preserve global accuracy as well as accuracy for sensitive and underrepre-sented groups. Finally, in algorithmic recourse, achieving fairness and robustness under counterfactual changes re-quires a causal structure to specify which interventions are feasible and admissible (Karimi et al., 2021). This makes causality a favorable design principle for future trustworthy AI systems and motivates systematic study of how these dimensions interact and can be reconciled through causal modeling. 

# 4. Integrating Causality into ML and Foundation Models 

In this section, we discuss how causality can be encoded in learning systems, spanning both classical ML models and modern foundation models (FMs). We focus on the high-level principles relevant to the feasibility of the causal approach. For a detailed overview of the methods see Ap-pendix B. 

4.1. Defining Explicit And Implicit Causal Integration 

Causal assumptions can be incorporated into learning sys-tems either explicitly, through structural representations, or implicitly, through inductive biases and training regimes that encourage causal behavior (Rawal et al., 2025). Based on this distinction, we define Explicit and Implicit approaches to causality in ML and FMs. 

Explicit causal integration. Explicit approaches repre-sent causal structure directly, typically via structural causal models (SCMs), causal graphs, or path-specific constraints, and learning objectives are defined to satisfy causal proper-ties under specified interventions. Formally, given a causal graph G, a model fθ is trained to satisfy invariance or sensitivity constraints derived from G.The primary strength of explicit causal integration lies in its transparency and auditability: causal constraints are inter-pretable, and violations can be traced to specific variables or pathways. This makes explicit approaches particularly well-suited to high-stakes settings where trade-offs between fairness, privacy, robustness, and explainability must be jus-tified and inspected. By distinguishing spurious, as well as admissible or inadmissible causal effects, explicit models allow selective invariance-preserving task-relevant mecha-nisms while suppressing normatively unacceptable ones. 

Implicit causal integration. Implicit approaches do not represent explicit causal structure, but instead encourage models to behave causally through training objectives, data diversity, sparsity, or environmental interaction. Formally, models are trained to satisfy causal properties without explicitly encoding the causal graph G, but rather a set of constraints C, e.g., sparsity. Implicit causal integration, by contrast, offers flexibility. It allows models to approximate causal behavior through inductive biases, multi-environment data, or counterfactual data augmentation, even when causal structure is incomplete or unknown. While they offer weaker formal guarantees, they can still soften trade-offs in practice by discouraging reliance on unstable, unethical, or spurious correlations. 

Resolving trade-offs. From the perspective of trustworthy AI trade-offs, explicit and implicit causal integration tend to be effective in different regimes. Explicit approaches are particularly well-suited to objectives that require norma-tive judgments about which causal pathways are admissi-ble, such as explainable vs. proxy discrimination paths in fairness. Implicit approaches, by contrast, are often more effective for trade-offs driven by spurious correlations or dis-tributional instability, such as robustness or privacy-utility trade-offs, especially in high-dimensional or large-scale set-tings where full causal structure is unavailable. In practice, many systems combine both modes, using explicit causal constraints to target specific effects while relying on implicit mechanisms to scale causal behavior more broadly. 

Integration into AI. The necessity of causality does not depend on model scale. The key distinction lies in how these assumptions are integrated. In smaller or more structured ML models, causal integration is often explicit : causal as-sumptions can be embedded directly into the model class or training objective, for example, by enforcing consistency with a specified causal graph during learning (Berrevoets et al., 2024). Such explicit integration enables strong, trans-parent causal guarantees, but relies on the availability of reliable causal structure. Foundation models, by contrast, rely predominantly on im-plicit causal integration. Their scale, opacity, and fixed pre-training pipelines make global explicit causal speci-fication impractical. Instead, causal assumptions are en-coded indirectly through data curation, representation learn-ing, inductive biases, and post-training objectives that en-courage invariant behavior without explicitly representing causal structure. This reliance on implicit mechanisms is not unique to foundation models—large neural models in classical ML settings also employ sparsity constraints or counterfactual data augmentation to induce causal behav-ior (Burgess et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2021; Kaddour et al., 6Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

2022)—but it becomes the dominant mode at scale. Nevertheless, recent work demonstrates that explicit causal structure can still be leveraged in foundation models in a tar-geted or partial manner, for example, through SCM-guided entity interventions or causal regularization applied to spe-cific components or behaviors (Wang et al., 2023; Madhavan et al., 2023). This suggests that effective causal integration in foundation models often takes a hybrid form, combining implicit causal learning at scale with localized explicit con-straints where interpretability or normative guarantees are required. 

4.2. Application to Foundational Models 

For FMs, causal integration is best understood as a lifecycle process, with different leverage points at pre-training, post-training, or auditing. Importantly, these stages differ not only in when causal assumptions are introduced, but also in what causal object is being manipulated. During pre-training , causal priors are introduced by inter-vening on the data-generating process or the representation space before task-specific objectives are defined. This in-cludes counterfactual data generation and causal represen-tation learning methods that aim to disentangle underlying generative factors (Rajendran et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2022). At this stage, causality operates primarily at the distributional level: interventions reshape the joint data distribution so that invariant mechanisms become sta-tistically identifiable, while spurious correlations are attenu-ated. Pre-training, therefore, offers a natural opportunity to encode broad structural assumptions that generalize across downstream tasks. At the post-training and alignment stage, causal assump-tions are enforced through fine-tuning, regularization, or alignment objectives that operate directly on model behav-ior (Xia et al., 2024). Rather than modifying the training distribution, constraints are expressed as requirements on how model outputs should respond to counterfactual per-turbations. This makes post-training the primary locus for enforcing trustworthy AI objectives in foundation models. Fairness, or robustness constraints, can be implemented as invariance or sensitivity conditions on outputs, even when the causal structure was not explicitly modeled during pre-training. Finally, during the auditing and interpretability phase, causal reasoning can be applied retrospectively, even when no causal constraints were imposed during training. Intervention-based probing, activation patching, and mech-anistic interpretability methods enable estimation of the causal influence of internal components on model behavior, supporting auditing and explanation (Kissane et al., 2024; Conmy et al., 2023; Syed et al., 2023). These approaches allow practitioners to assess whether learned representations and internal circuits satisfy desired invariance properties, and to diagnose failure modes related to fairness, robust-ness, or spurious correlations without modifying the training pipeline. 

# 5. Challenges and Opportunities 

Despite the advantages of a causal approach, practical ap-plications face fundamental limitations that arise from the same design choices that enable causal integration. In partic-ular, trade-offs between explicit and implicit representations, between early and late intervention in the model lifecycle limits what guarantees can be achieved in practice. These limitations are amplified in foundation models due to their scale, opacity, and decoupled training pipelines. We outline key conceptual and practical obstacles and corresponding opportunities for navigating this design space. 

5.1. Conceptual Challenges Potentially unresolvable tensions. Not all tensions in trustworthy AI can always be fully resolved. For in-stance, stronger privacy protections often reduce model utility (Dwork et al., 2014; Bassily et al., 2014). We also acknowledge that some fairness conflicts stem from deeper normative or value-based disagreements; for example, a causal relationship may exist, but relying on it in decision-making may still be viewed as unfair from an ethical or legal standpoint. In these cases, causality does not elim-inate trade-offs; however, it makes their structural origin explicit, shifting the debate from engineering heuristics to transparent normative choices. 

Concept superposition. Foundation models suffer from concept superposition, namely, multiple meanings are en-tangled within a single representation, complicating causal reasoning (Elhage et al., 2022). This limits the granularity at which causal interventions can be applied, shifting causal control toward behavior-level constraints. 

5.2. Implementation Challenges Assumptions and identifiability. The main limitation of explicit causal integration is its reliance on accurate or par-tially specified causal knowledge, particularly in the form of DAGs. Misspecified graphs or incorrect structural as-sumptions can lead to incorrect invariances or unintended behavior. Expert-constructed DAGs may suffer from subjec-tivity and scalability issues, while ML-based causal discov-ery is constrained by identifiability assumptions and noise sensitivity. However, recent hybrid approaches combining classical causal discovery with LLM-based reasoning offer promising solutions (Afonja et al., 2024). In addition, ap-proximate causal interventions are possible with a partial 7Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

causal graph (Zuo et al., 2022). Implicit approaches make weaker structural assumptions, but they are not assumption-free. They rely on properties such as environmental diversity, intervention coverage, or stability of causal mechanisms across domains. When these conditions fail, e.g., when all training environments share the same confounding structure, implicit methods may con-verge to spurious but stable correlations. 

Scaling. Explicit causal approaches scale poorly with the complexity of the causal structure, rather than with model size alone. As the number of variables, dependencies, or latent confounders grows, specifying and enforcing global causal constraints becomes difficult. In practice, explicit methods are therefore often applied locally or partially, for example, by constraining specific pathways relevant to fair-ness (Wang et al., 2023). Hybrid strategies that combine partial causal structure with implicit learning objectives offer a practical compromise between interpretability and scalability. Implicit approaches, by contrast, scale naturally with model and data size, as they rely on data augmentation, representation learning, and objective design rather than explicit symbolic causal structure. 

Evaluation and benchmarking. Evaluating causal integra-tion remains challenging due to the lack of standardized benchmarks that reflect interventional objectives. Most existing evaluations rely on observational performance, which may obscure failures under interventions. Developing benchmarks and evaluation protocols aligned with causal invariance requirements is, therefore, a critical opportunity for advancing trustworthy AI. 

Lack of high-quality causal data. Applying causal inte-gration at the pre-training phase requires high-quality inter-ventional data, which are scarce and expensive to produce. Scalable methods for generating synthetic causal datasets show a promising direction (Webster et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022). Alternatively, focusing on post-training methods al-lows causal interventions in a more data-efficient way. 

Computational complexity. Integrating causal reasoning into large models introduces additional computational over-head, for example, through counterfactual evaluation or causal regularization during training. Parameter-efficient adaptation methods such as LoRA reduce this burden by restricting updates to low-rank subspaces, enabling efficient causal fine-tuning without modifying the full parameter set (Hu et al., 2021). 

# 6. Alternative Views 

Symbolic AI leverages prior knowledge through logic rules, ontologies, and formal representations, supporting struc-tured reasoning, explainability, and generalization from small data (Díaz-Rodríguez et al., 2022). It can also help navigate trade-offs, for example, between accuracy and in-teroperability, by making the reasoning process more trans-parent and controllable. While both symbolic AI and causal reasoning rely on prior assumptions, causality uniquely en-ables reasoning about interventions and counterfactuals. Un-like symbolic systems that model static relationships, causal models capture how changes in one variable affect others - an essential feature in domains like fairness and policy evaluation. A dominant alternative position advocates for improving model performance by scaling, and deems causal approaches as impractical. Our goal therefore, is to illus-trate that implicit, explicit, or hybrid causal guidance can provide feasible, data-efficient methods for both performant and trustworthy AI models. 

# 7. Conclusion and Call for Action 

We demonstrate that causal models offer a principled ap-proach to trustworthy AI by disentangling conflicting invari-ance requirements and shifting attention from observational to interventional accuracy. Hence, the causal approach cre-ates models that are not only ethically sound but also practi-cally effective. We further discuss practical ways to apply causality to AI by distinguishing explicit and implicit de-sign. To further advance the application of causality for trustworthy AI, we call for the following actions      

> ✓Redefine trustworthy AI as a multi-objective optimization, rather than as a collection of competing constraints. This requires establishing evaluation frameworks and benchmarks that jointly measure objectives of trustworthy AI, explicitly quantifying the trade-offs between them via multi-objective evaluation metrics.
> ✓Leverage Causality to Resolve or Soften Trade-offs :Where possible, integrate causal reasoning to disentangle competing objectives and mitigate conflicts.
> ✓Develop Scalable Methods for Causal Data Integration :Encourage the development of algorithms and pipelines to integrate causal knowledge into foundation models at scale.
> ✓Create and Share High-Quality Causal Datasets : Foster initiatives to curate, annotate, and share datasets with explicit causal annotations or interventional information.

# Impact statement 

This paper advances a causal perspective on trustworthy foundation models by framing fairness, privacy, robustness, and explainability as competing invariance requirements under interventions. Rather than treating trade-offs between these objectives as incidental, our analysis clarifies when they are structurally unavoidable and when they can be soft-ened through selective causal invariance. By making the 8Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

assumptions underlying these trade-offs explicit, the pro-posed framework supports more transparent, accountable, and principled design of learning-based AI systems, partic-ularly in high-stakes domains such as healthcare, law, and finance. 

# References 

Abdulaal, A., Montana-Brown, N., He, T., Ijishakin, A., Drobnjak, I., Castro, D. C., Alexander, D. C., et al. Causal modelling agents: Causal graph discovery through syn-ergising metadata-and data-driven reasoning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2023. Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv , 2023. Afonja, T., Sheth, I., Binkyte, R., Hanif, W., Ulas, T., Becker, M., and Fritz, M. LLM4GRN: Discovering causal gene regulatory networks with LLMs–evaluation through syn-thetic data generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15828 ,2024. AI4Science, M. R. and Quantum, M. A. The impact of large language models on scientific discovery: a preliminary study using gpt-4. arXiv , 2023. Bagheri, A., Alinejad, M., Bello, K., and Akhondi-Asl, A. C2p: Featuring large language models with causal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18069 , 2024. Bassily, R., Smith, A., and Thakurta, A. Private empirical risk minimization: Efficient algorithms and tight error bounds. Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2014. Berrevoets, J., Kacprzyk, K., Qian, Z., van der Schaar, M., et al. Causal deep learning: encouraging impact on real-world problems through causality. Foundations and Trends® in Signal Processing , 18(3):200–309, 2024. Bi, X., Wu, D., Xie, D., Ye, H., and Zhao, J. Large-scale chemical process causal discovery from big data with transformer-based deep learning. Process Safety and Environmental Protection , 173:163–177, 2023. Binkyte, R., Pinzón, C. A., Lestyán, S., Jung, K., Arcolezi, H. H., and Palamidessi, C. Causal discovery under local privacy. In Causal Learning and Reasoning , pp. 325–383. PMLR, 2024. Brinkmann, J., Sheshadri, A., Levoso, V., Swoboda, P., and Bartelt, C. A mechanistic analysis of a transformer trained on a symbolic multi-step reasoning task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11917 , 2024. Burgess, C. P., Higgins, I., Pal, A., Matthey, L., Watters, N., Desjardins, G., and Lerchner, A. Understanding disentan-gling in vae. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03599 , 2018. Carvalho, T., Moniz, N., Faria, P., and Antunes, L. Towards a data privacy-predictive performance trade-off. Expert Systems with Applications , pp. 119785, 2023. Chen, Z., Gao, Q., Bosselut, A., Sabharwal, A., and Richard-son, K. Disco: Distilling counterfactuals with large lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10534 , 2022. Chernozhukov, V., Chetverikov, D., Demirer, M., Duflo, E., Hansen, C., Newey, W., and Robins, J. Double/debiased machine learning for treatment and structural parameters, 2018. Chiappa, S. Path-specific counterfactual fairness. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 33, pp. 7801–7808, 2019. Conmy, A., Mavor-Parker, A., Lynch, A., Heimersheim, S., and Garriga-Alonso, A. Towards automated circuit dis-covery for mechanistic interpretability. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 36:16318–16352, 2023. Crook, B., Schlüter, M., and Speith, T. Revisiting the performance-explainability trade-off in explainable artifi-cial intelligence (xai). In 2023 IEEE 31st International Requirements Engineering Conference Workshops (REW) ,pp. 316–324. IEEE, 2023. Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Lamas, A., Sanchez, J., Franchi, G., Donadello, I., Tabik, S., Filliat, D., Cruz, P., Montes, R., and Herrera, F. Explainable neural-symbolic learning (x-nesyl) methodology to fuse deep learning representations with expert knowledge graphs: the monumai cultural heritage use case. Information Fusion , 79:58–83, 2022. Dwork, C., Roth, A., et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations and Trends® in Theo-retical Computer Science , 9(3–4):211–407, 2014. Elhage, N., Olsson, C., Henighan, T., Hernandez, D., Joseph, N., Mann, B., Askell, A., DasSarma, N., Tran-Johnson, E., Amodei, D., Brown, T., Clark, J., McCandlish, S., and Olah, C. Toy models of superposition. Transformer Circuits Thread , 2022. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/ 2022/toy_model/ .European Commission. European Union AI act, 2021. URL https://eur-lex.europa. eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX: 52021PC0206 . Proposal for a regulation laying down harmonized rules on artificial intelligence. 9Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

Friedler, S. A., Scheidegger, C., and Venkatasubramanian, S. The (im) possibility of fairness: Different value systems require different mechanisms for fair decision making. 

Communications of the ACM , 64(4):136–143, 2021. Ganguly, N., Fazlija, D., Badar, M., Fisichella, M., Sikdar, S., Schrader, J., Wallat, J., Rudra, K., Koubarakis, M., Patro, G. K., et al. A review of the role of causality in developing trustworthy ai systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06975 , 2023. Geiger, A., Ibeling, D., Zur, A., Chaudhary, M., Chauhan, S., Huang, J., Arora, A., Wu, Z., Goodman, N., Potts, C., et al. Causal abstraction: A theoretical foundation for mechanistic interpretability. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(83):1–64, 2025. Goudet, O., Kalainathan, D., Caillou, P., Guyon, I., Lopez-Paz, D., and Sebag, M. Causal generative neural networks. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08936 , 2017. Guo, Y., Yang, Y., and Abbasi, A. Auto-debias: Debiasing masked language models with automated biased prompts. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 1012–1023, 2022. Hauser, A. and Bühlmann, P. Characterization and greedy learning of interventional Markov equivalence classes of directed acyclic graphs. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 13:2409–2464, 2012. URL https://jmlr. org/papers/v13/hauser12a.html .He, J., Xia, M., Fellbaum, C., and Chen, D. Mabel: Atten-uating gender bias using textual entailment data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14975 , 2022. Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., and Chen, W. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 , 2021. Janzing, D. and Schölkopf, B. Causal inference using the algorithmic markov condition. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 56(10):5168–5194, 2010. Jiang, Y., Rajendran, G., Ravikumar, P., Aragam, B., and Veitch, V. On the origins of linear representations in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03867 ,2024. Kaddour, J., Lynch, A., Liu, Q., Kusner, M. J., and Silva, R. Causal machine learning: A survey and open problems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.15475 , 2022. Kaneko, M. and Bollegala, D. Debiasing pre-trained contex-tualised embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.09523 ,2021. Karimi, A.-H., Schölkopf, B., and Valera, I. Algorithmic recourse: from counterfactual explanations to interven-tions. In 4th Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (ACM FAccT) , pp. 353–362, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3442188.3445899. Kasetty, T., Mahajan, D., Dziugaite, G. K., Drouin, A., and Sridhar, D. Evaluating interventional reasoning capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05545 , 2024. Khatibi, E., Abbasian, M., Yang, Z., Azimi, I., and Rah-mani, A. M. ALCM: Autonomous llm-augmented causal discovery framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01744 ,2024. Kıcıman, E., Ness, R., Sharma, A., and Tan, C. Causal reasoning and large language models: Opening a new frontier for causality. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2023) , 2023. Kilbertus, N., Carulla, M. R., Parascandolo, G., Hardt, M., Janzing, D., and Schölkopf, B. Avoiding discrimination through causal reasoning. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , pp. 656–666, 2017. Kim, H., Shin, S., Jang, J., Song, K., Joo, W., Kang, W., and Moon, I.-C. Counterfactual fairness with disentangled causal effect variational autoencoder. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 35, pp. 8128–8136, 2021. Kim, J. S., Chen, J., and Talwalkar, A. Fact: A diagnostic for group fairness trade-offs. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 5264–5274. PMLR, 2020. Kissane, C., Krzyzanowski, R., Bloom, J. I., Conmy, A., and Nanda, N. Interpreting attention layer outputs with sparse autoencoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17759 ,2024. Le, T. D., Hoang, T., Li, J., Liu, L., Liu, H., and Hu, S. A fast pc algorithm for high dimensional causal discovery with multi-core pcs. IEEE/ACM transactions on compu-tational biology and bioinformatics , 16(5):1483–1495, 2016. Liu, H., Chaudhary, M., and Wang, H. Towards trustworthy and aligned machine learning: A data-centric survey with causality perspectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16851 ,2023. Loftus, J. R., Russell, C., Kusner, M. J., and Silva, R. Causal reasoning for algorithmic fairness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.05859 , 2018. London, A. J. Artificial intelligence and black-box medi-cal decisions: accuracy versus explainability. Hastings Center Report , 49(1):15–21, 2019. 10 Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

Madhavan, R., Garg, R., Wadhawan, K., and Mehta, S. Cfl: Causally fair language models through token-level attribute controlled generation, 2023. Nauta, M., Bucur, D., and Seifert, C. Causal discovery with attention-based convolutional neural networks. Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction , 1(1):19, 2019. Pearl, J. Causality . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2009. ISBN 978-0-521-89560-6. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511803161. URL https://www. cambridge.org/core/books/causality/ B0046844FAE10CBF274D4ACBDAEB5F5B .Peters, J., Mooij, J., Janzing, D., and Schölkopf, B. Iden-tifiability of causal graphs using functional models. In Cozman, F. G. and Pfeffer, A. (eds.), 27th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , pp. 589–598, Corvallis, OR, 2011. AUAI Press. Pujol, D., McKenna, R., Kuppam, S., Hay, M., Machanava-jjhala, A., and Miklau, G. Fair decision making using privacy-protected data. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,pp. 189–199, 2020. Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Xu, T., Brockman, G., McLeavey, C., and Sutskever, I. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In ICML , 2023. Rajendran, G., Buchholz, S., Aragam, B., Schölkopf, B., and Ravikumar, P. Learning interpretable concepts: Unifying causal representation learning and foundation models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09236 , 2024. Rawal, A., Raglin, A., Rawat, D. B., Sadler, B. M., and McCoy, J. Causality for trustworthy artificial intelligence: status, challenges and perspectives. ACM Computing Surveys , 57(6):1–30, 2025. Richens, J. and Everitt, T. Robust agents learn causal world models. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) , 2024. Schölkopf, B., Hogg, D., Wang, D., Foreman-Mackey, D., Janzing, D., Simon-Gabriel, C.-J., and Peters, J. Model-ing confounding by half-sibling regression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science , 113(27):7391–7398, 2016. Schölkopf, B., Locatello, F., Bauer, S., Ke, N. R., Kalch-brenner, N., Goyal, A., and Bengio, Y. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of the IEEE , 109(5): 612–634, 2021. Sharkey, L., Ghuidhir, C. N., Braun, D., Scheurer, J., Balesni, M., Bushnaq, L., Stix, C., and Hobbhahn, M. A causal framework for ai regulation and auditing. Pub-lisher: Preprints , 2024. Sheth, I., Abdelnabi, S., and Fritz, M. Hypothesizing missing causal variables with llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02604 , 2024. Shimizu, S., Hoyer, P. O., Hyvärinen, A., Kerminen, A., and Jordan, M. A linear non-gaussian acyclic model for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,7(10), 2006. Spirtes, P., Glymour, C. N., and Scheines, R. Causation, prediction, and search . MIT press, 2000. Syed, A., Rager, C., and Conmy, A. Attribution patching outperforms automated circuit discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10348 , 2023. Team, G., Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., Alayrac, J.-B., Yu, J., Sori-cut, R., Schalkwyk, J., Dai, A. M., Hauth, A., Millican, K., et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , 2023. Tople, S., Sharma, A., and Nori, A. Alleviating privacy attacks via causal learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 9537–9547. PMLR, 2020. Tschantz, M. C., Sen, S., and Datta, A. Sok: Differential privacy as a causal property. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , pp. 354–371. IEEE, 2020. Tsipras, D., Santurkar, S., Engstrom, L., Turner, A., and Madry, A. Robustness may be at odds with accuracy. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12152 , 2018. van der Veer, S. N., Riste, L., Cheraghi-Sohi, S., Phipps, D. L., Tully, M. P., Bozentko, K., Atwood, S., Hubbard, A., Wiper, C., Oswald, M., et al. Trading off accuracy and explainability in ai decision-making: findings from 2 citi-zens’ juries. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 28(10):2128–2138, 2021. Vashishtha, A., Reddy, A. G., Kumar, A., Bachu, S., Balasubramanian, V. N., and Sharma, A. Causal in-ference using llm-guided discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15117 , 2023. Vincent, J. Google pauses gemini ai image generation after historical inaccuracies spark backlash. The Verge , 2024. URL https://www.theverge.com .Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., and Russell, C. Counterfactual explanations without opening the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr. Harvard Journal of Law and Technology , 31(2):841–887, 2017. Wang, F., Mo, W., Wang, Y., Zhou, W., and Chen, M. A causal view of entity bias in (large) language models. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2023 , pp. 15173–15184, 2023. 11 Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

Wang, Z. and Culotta, A. Identifying spurious corre-lations for robust text classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02458 , 2020. Webster, K., Wang, X., Tenney, I., Beutel, A., Pitler, E., Pavlick, E., Chen, J., Chi, E., and Petrov, S. Measuring and reducing gendered correlations in pre-trained models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.06032 , 2020. Xia, Y., Yu, T., He, Z., Zhao, H., McAuley, J., and Li, S. Aligning as debiasing: Causality-aware align-ment via reinforcement learning with interventional feedback. In Duh, K., Gomez, H., and Bethard, S. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 4684–4695, Mexico City, Mexico, June 2024. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.naacl-long. 262. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024. naacl-long.262/ .Xu, L., Jiang, C., Qian, Y., Li, J., Zhao, Y., and Ren, Y. Privacy-accuracy trade-off in differentially-private distributed classification: A game theoretical approach. 

IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 7(4):770–783, 2017. Zhao, H. and Gordon, G. J. Inherent tradeoffs in learning fair representations. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 23(1):2527–2552, 2022. Zhou, F., Mao, Y., Yu, L., Yang, Y., and Zhong, T. Causal-debias: Unifying debiasing in pretrained language models and fine-tuning via causal invariant learning. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 4227–4241, 2023. Zinati, Y., Takiddeen, A., and Emad, A. Groundgan: Grn-guided simulation of single-cell rna-seq data using causal generative adversarial networks. Nature Communications ,15(1):4055, 2024. Zliobaite, I. On the relation between accuracy and fairness in binary classification. The 2nd workshop on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine Learning (FATML) at ICML’15 , 2015. Zuo, A., Wei, S., Liu, T., Han, B., Zhang, K., and Gong, M. Counterfactual fairness with partially known causal graph. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 1238–1252, 2022. 12 Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

# A. Motivating Example 

Consider a model trained to predict whether a patient will be readmitted within 30 days after discharge. The model uses patient information such as age and laboratory measurements, and is deployed across multiple hospitals. Although age is statistically correlated with readmission risk, it should not influence decisions directly, or indirectly through proxy variables, such as insurance type, which introduce bias and discrimination. Age may affect the prediction only through legitimate clinical signals, such as lab results. In addition, hospitals differ in medical devices, data logging systems, and discharge policies, which induces environment-dependent variation in the observed data. Some of this variation is purely spurious, reflecting measurement artifacts, such as image frames, while other differences reflect real domain-specific mechanisms, such as internal policies. Moreover, patient attributes are sensitive and must be protected, motivating privacy-preserving learning. However, privacy mechanisms often degrade performance by injecting noise. This example illustrates the fundamental challenge of building models that are simultaneously fair, robust to domain shifts, privacy-preserving, and explainable. 

Causal model. We consider a structural causal model (SCM) with observed variables A (protected attribute - age), E

(environment or domain - hospital), X (legitimate observed features), Z (proxy feature - insurance type), and Y (target label - hospital readmission). The causal graph encodes the following relations: A → X → Y (legitimate path based on lab tests and vitals), A → Z → Y (proxy-based discriminatory path based on insurance type), A → Y (direct discrimination based on age) E → X (environment-dependent spurious measurement artifacts, such as image frames), and E → Y

(domain-dependent outcome mechanism, such as hospital policies). 

Fairness. We define fairness as the removal of all unfair causal effects of the protected attribute A on the target Y . This is achieved by blocking the causal paths A → Z → Y and A → Y , thereby eliminating both direct and proxy-mediated discriminatory influence. The remaining path A → X → Y represents legitimate influence through task-relevant features. 

Robustness. We distinguish between spurious and contextual environment effects. Spurious environment effects cor-respond to measurement artifacts, modeled by the path E → X → Y . We block this path to prevent the predictor from exploiting non-semantic, environment-induced variation. At the same time, we explicitly model the contextual effect 

E → Y , which captures genuine domain-dependent mechanisms (e.g., policy differences). Thus, robustness is achieved by enforcing invariance to spurious environment-induced shifts while conditioning on domain context. 

Privacy. Focusing on causal features and discarding spurious correlations, the resulting models are less prone to overfitting and exhibit improved robustness to adversarial perturbations. This allows strong privacy guarantees with reduced noise and impact on predictive performance. Moreover, targeted and path specific obfuscation is possible. 

Explainability. The proposed framework is explainable by design, since predictions correspond to explicit causal pathways in the underlying causal graph. In conclusion, this unified causal perspective enables resolving or softening the trade-offs and achieving accurate, robust, fair, private and explainable models. 

# B. Methods 

B.1. Integrating Causality into ML 

Integrating causality into ML allows models to move beyond surface-level patterns and capture the underlying mechanisms that generate data. This section introduces methods for incorporating causal knowledge into ML models, as well as techniques for using ML to discover causal relationships from data. 

Causally Constrained ML (CCML). CCML refers to approaches that explicitly incorporate causal relationships into model training or inference as constraints or guiding principles. Given a causal graph G = ( V, E), where V represents variables and E denotes directed edges encoding causal relationships, the goal is to ensure that the learned model f : X → Y adheres to the causal structure encoded in G (Berrevoets et al., 2024; Zinati et al., 2024; Afonja et al., 2024; Schölkopf et al., 2016). 

Invariant feature learning (IFL). IFL relies on discovered implicit or latent causal features and structures. The task of Invariant Feature Learning (IFL) is to identify features of the data X that are predictive of the target Y across a range of environments E. From a causal perspective, the causal parents Pa (Y ) are always predictive of Y under any interventional distribution (Kaddour et al., 2022). IFL can be achieved by regularizing the model or providing causal training data that is 13 Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

free of confounding. 

Disentangled VAEs. VAEs aim to decompose the data X into disentangled latent factors Z that correspond to distinct underlying generative causes, especially when trained with causal constraints or interventional data (Burgess et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2021). This aligns with causal reasoning, as each latent dimension can be interpreted as an independent causal factor influencing the observed data. 

Double Machine Learning (DML). DML provides another causal approach by leveraging modern ML techniques for estimating high-dimensional nuisance parameters while preserving statistical guarantees in causal inference (Chernozhukov et al., 2018). DML decomposes the estimation problem into two stages: (1) predicting confounders using ML models and (2) estimating the causal effect using residualized outcomes. 

Causal Discovery. Finally, ML can be leveraged for causal inference or to discover causal knowledge from observational data. For instance, methods for causal discovery use conditional independence, score, or noise asymmetry-based methods, to infer causal relationships, with notable examples including (Spirtes et al., 2000; Shimizu et al., 2006; Janzing & Schölkopf, 2010; Peters et al., 2011; Hauser & Bühlmann, 2012; Le et al., 2016). More recent methods leverage Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in combination for causal discovery (Nauta et al., 2019; Bi et al., 2023; Goudet et al., 2017). 

Summary and Use Cases. 

The methods presented above represent a spectrum of causal integration strategies in ML. CCML requires explicit or semi-explicit causal structures, offering high interpretability but often demanding strong prior knowledge. However, explicit causal guardrails are beneficial for high-stakes applications requiring clear accountability. In contrast, IFL, DML, and Disentangled VAEs operate with weaker structural assumptions and are well-suited for settings with limited causal annotations as well as exploratory tasks or scalable representation learning in unstructured data. Causal Discovery lies at the other end of the spectrum, aiming to uncover causal relationships from data alone. Combining methods—for example, using causal discovery to inform CCML also help balance rigor and practicality. 

B.2. Integrating Causality in Foundation Models 

This section delves into practical applications of causality in FMs across three key stages: pre-training, post-training, and auditing. We conclude with a discussion of the practical advantages and limitations of the proposed approaches. 

Causal Representation Learning. By disentangling causal factors from non-causal ones, models can learn representations that separate meaningful causal features from irrelevant associations. Techniques such as causal embedding methods (Ra-jendran et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024), use training data annotated with causal labels. This has been shown to reduce reliance on spurious correlations, such as gender-biased occupational associations (Zhou et al., 2023). Fine-tuning models on embeddings pre-trained with debiased token representations has shown promise for causal learning (Kaneko & Bollegala, 2021; Guo et al., 2022; He et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). 

Entity interventions. SCMs can be used to determine interventions on specific entities (e.g., replacing “Joe Biden" with “ENTITY-A") during pre-training (Wang et al., 2023), thus reducing entity-based spurious associations while preserving causal relationships in the data. 

Counterfactual Data Augmentation. Synthetic datasets with explicit causal structures or counterfactual examples, that introduce scenarios where causal relationships differ from spurious correlations, help models learn true causal dependencies instead of misleading patterns (Webster et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022). Synthetic causal data can also be used for fine-tuning the models, similar to pre-training, but with better sample size efficiency. Frameworks like DISCO (Chen et al., 2022) generate diverse counterfactuals during fine-tuning to enhance OOD generalization for downstream tasks. 

SCM-based Methods. Causally Fair Language Models (CFL) (Madhavan et al., 2023) use SCM-based regularization to detoxify outputs or enforce demographically neutral generation during post-training. Wang & Culotta (2020) use causal reasoning to separate genuine from spurious correlations by computing controlled direct effects, ensuring robust performance. 

Causal RLHF Alignement. RLHF can be adapted to include causal interventions, allowing feedback to act as instrumental variables that correct biased model behavior. Causality-Aware Alignment (Xia et al., 2024) incorporates causal interventions to reduce demographic stereotypes during fine-tuning with alignment objectives. Extending RLHF with causal alignment to support dynamic, context-sensitive interventions could help address biases that evolve. Integrating causal reasoning into the 14 Position: Trustworthy AI Suffers from Invariance Conflicts and Causality is the Solution 

reward model’s decision-making process, by critiquing the output of LLM using a reward model or a mixture of reward models that control for specific confounders or spurious correlations, can potentially improve the downstream reasoning abilities, potentially mitigating hallucinations. 

Latent Representation Discovery. Recent work in mechanistic interpretability has employed sparse autoencoders to extract interpretable latent representations aligned with internal circuit features (Kissane et al., 2024; Conmy et al., 2023). These methods enable the identification of functional substructures within models by isolating meaningful directions in activation space. 

Targeted Interrogation Methods. Techniques based on interventions, such as ablation, activation patching, or causal scrub-bing, allow us to move beyond passive observation by directly testing the functional roles of model components (Brinkmann et al., 2024; Syed et al., 2023). These methods provide a powerful framework for identifying how specific neurons or pathways contribute to behavior, enabling rigorous, theory-driven interpretability. 

Causal Discovery. The recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have inspired their use in causal discov-ery (Kıcıman et al., 2023; Kasetty et al., 2024; Vashishtha et al., 2023; AI4Science & Quantum, 2023; Abdulaal et al., 2023; Khatibi et al., 2024). Most of the above methods involve the refinement of the statistically inferred causal graph by LLM. However, emerging research shows that LLMs can be useful in constructing full causal graphs based on parametric knowledge of scientific literature in diverse domains (Sheth et al., 2024; Afonja et al., 2024). 

Summary and Use Cases. 

These methods span both causal inference and integration. Causal data augmentation, representation learning, and entity interventions are methods used in pretraining, where broad structural priors can be encoded. In contrast, causal fine-tuning, alignment, and auditing are post-training methods requiring less causally annotated data, but more explicit goals and causal structures. Latent representation discovery and targeted interrogation methods stand out as a retrospective techniques that can help to assess fairness, privacy, and robustness without modifying the training pipeline. Causal discovery can support both pre- and post-training by informing model design or evaluating learned representations. Selecting among these approaches depends on the availability of causal knowledge, the interpretability needs, and the constraints of the training pipeline. 15