Title: Rigorous Interpretation Is a Form of Evaluation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.05508v1

Published Time: Fri, 08 May 2026 00:19:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Rigorous Interpretation Is a Form of Evaluation 

## Isabelle Lee *

## USC 

## Emmy Liu 

## CMU 

## Cathy Jiao 

## CMU 

## Brihi Joshi 

## USC 

## Dani Yogatama 

## USC 

## Fazl Barez 

## Oxford & WhiteBox 

## Michael Saxon 

## UW †

## Abstract 

Current machine learning models are evalu-ated through behavioral snapshots, with bench-mark accuracies, win rates and outcome-based metrics. Model explanations and evaluations, however, are fundamentally intertwined: under-standing why a model produces a behavior can be as important as measuring what it produces. If we trusted interpretability, we argue that it can serve not merely as diagnostics but as a richer and more principled form of model eval-uation beyond surface-level performance met-rics. We explore three ways interpretability can function evaluatively: (1) fixing problems by identifying the root causes of unwanted behav-ior, (2) detecting subtly faulty mechanisms that invalidate model outputs, and (3) predicting po-tential issues before they arise by fully under-standing the model’s weaknesses. To fulfill its evaluative potential, we argue that interpretabil-ity methods must generate claims that are fal-sifiable, reproducible, and predictive—that is, interpretability must meet scientific standards. 

## 1 Introduction 

Current machine learning models are evaluated on their outputs. Typically, they are behaviorally as-sessed by performances on held-out data, win rates on benchmarks—some aggregate of these task metric scores. While these forms of evaluations capture immediate summary of behavior in a few numbers, they only capture surface competence. Two models may achieve identical behavior while relying on radically different internal mechanisms for example: one grounded in sound reasoning and computation and therefore structurally robust, the other brittle, heuristic driven. This position paper argues that interpretability 

has the potential to expand current model assess-ment beyond surface-level behavioral evaluation  

> *Correspond to lee.isabelle.g@gmail.com
> †Now at Google Deepmind.

to mechanism-level scrutiny. This is not to suggest that benchmarks are uninformative; rather, inter-pretability can deepen and extend them. However, for interpretability to serve this evaluative role, it must meet scientific standards. Interpretability claims must be falsifiable, reproducible, and pre-dictive. Without these properties, interpretability remains descriptive rather than evaluative. If interpretability satisfies these standards, it can transform evaluation from a retrospective summary of behavior into a dynamic, mechanism-sensitive process. By making internal structures accessible, interpretability enables: (1) causal diagnosis and repair of known failures, (2) detection of faulty reasoning even when outputs appear correct, and (3) anticipation of failures before they manifest behaviorally. More specifically: 1. Falsifiability enables debugging. In this sce-nario, we identified undesirable model be-havior using well-defined evaluation criterion, and we want to use interpretability to debug and fix it. Falsifiability, defined as the quality of a claim being structured so it can in prin-ciple be proven wrong through targeted tests or interventions, is essential here. If we can make falsifiable, causal interpretability claims, we can reliably use model-based approach to correct unwanted associations at an architec-tural level, thereby addressing the root cause of the problem. Static benchmarks may reveal when models fail and sometimes characterize the nature of those failures, but they do not explain why the failure occurs or how to fix it. Interpretability may offer a pathway for more principled debugging. 2. Reproducibility ensures detection of faulty mechanisms. In this scenario, the evaluative criterion is unknown or poorly defined, so we use interpretability to identify the reasoning 1

> arXiv:2605.05508v1 [cs.CY] 6 May 2026

or associations behind a model decision. In-terpretability here functions as a mechanism-level evaluation , because it can assess inter-nal reasoning rather than just output, which can detect when a model produces a plausi-ble output while relying on spurious corre-lation or heuristic shortcuts—that is, if our interpretability methods met the standards of robustness, reliability, and reproducibility. To serve this role as a scientific tool, interpretabil-ity methods must be reproducible and reliable, consistently identifying the same mechanisms across runs and remaining robust to perturba-tions; otherwise, apparent findings may reflect noise rather than genuine faulty reasoning. 3. Predicting future failures. In this scenario, we don’t have a specific pre-set evaluative criterion or particular decision we wish to ex-amine. Instead, we aim to predict potential problematic behavior or criteria that the model might struggle with in general. By applying the framework of scientific prediction as test-ing of our understanding, we generate inter-pretability claims that are predictive. By ana-lyzing the model’s internal behavior on a natu-ral or in-distribution input set, interpretability techniques can help generate challenge sets or anticipate which types of inputs might cause issues. Practically, this can be seen as a way to stress-test the model before it is released to the public, allowing further refinement. Taken together, interpretability can be reframed not merely as an exploratory add-on, but as a sci-entifically grounded and reliable explanation of behavior: an evaluation in its own right. Current evaluations are largely a retrospective summary of behaviors, but interpretability has the potential to transform evaluations into a forward-looking, mechanism sensitive discipline. When held to rig-orous standards, interpretability can be evaluation. 

## 2 Falsifiability enables debugging 

One direct application of interpretability is to de-bug a model by identifying the internal origins of a model’s problematic output and correcting them by direct modification or retraining. Unlike evaluation, interpretability can not only characterize the prob-lematic behavior, but also may expose the internal failures underlying a particular behavior. However, for the interpretability claims to be testable and therefore reliably correctable, they must be falsifi-able (Popper, 2005; Leavitt and Morcos, 2020)— that is, they can in principle be counterfactually 

disprovable .Leavitt and Morcos critique a tendency in parts of the interpretability literature to prioritize intuition-building over the formulation of falsifi-able hypotheses. In particular, they argue that at-tention heatmaps, component visualizations, and similar input-based explanations often function as descriptive aids rather than as testable claims about a model’s internal mechanisms. Such approaches may help researchers build intuitions about how models behave, but they do not necessarily gener-ate hypotheses that can be rigorously confirmed or disconfirmed. More broadly, they caution against explanatory claims that merely redescribe behavior without exposing themselves to potential refutation. In this respect, causal and mechanistic interpretabil-ity approaches appear to better meet Leavitt and Morcos’s standard of hypotheses strength, as they more frequently articulate hypotheses that range from weakly to moderately falsifiable. Current causal interpretations, however, face structural limitations that undermine this falsifi-able debugging ideal. Many proposed features are 

non-specific : intervening on them affects multi-ple behaviors rather than isolating a single target function, leaving their representational role unclear. They are often inconsistent : the same interven-tion does not reliably produce the same behavioral shift across similar inputs. And they are subject to underdetermination : multiple distinct features can appear to influence the same behavior, with no principled way to identify which, if any, constitutes the true causal mechanism. When these conditions obtain, the debugging analogy collapses—the “fea-ture” no longer behaves like a stable component but like a correlated direction in a high-dimensional space. A genuinely falsifiable debugging claim would require a stable causal unit, predictable in-tervention effects, and clear criteria for success or failure. Many current mechanistic interpretations fall short of these standards. In this section, we first consider cases where interpretability methods do succeed in identifying meaningful, actionable features (§2.1). We then turn to cases where interpretability, particularly causal methods, breaks down (§2.2), and examine the specific modes of failure in those settings. 22.1 Sometimes interpretation can fix problems 

Interpretability, at its best, helps identify the root cause of model misbehavior by illuminating how predictions are made. For example, explanations produced by concept bottleneck methods learn concepts specified by domain experts; these concepts are then used to constrain the model outputs, preventing errors at test time (Koh et al., 2020; Losch et al., 2019). Concept bottleneck interpreters are developed through supervised 

training on explicit concept labels provided by domain experts. These highlighted concepts outputted demonstrate what a model uses to arrive at a certain output. To fix the incorrect model output, we can directly intervene on weights of the model corresponding to found explanations. Concept bottleneck methods have shown promise in medical imaging; Koh et al. (2020) reported significantly improved performance in modeling knee osteoarthritis from X-rays after domain experts edited the model’s predictions. However, this test-time debugging approach relies on experts’ curated concepts, which are not easily transferable across tasks or, in some cases, even datasets (Hayashi and Sawada, 2023; Shin et al., 2023). Another recent example is Sieve (Karvonen et al., 2024a), a code-specific suite of SAEs trained on public coding datasets. By promoting LM activa-tion features related to regular expressions, Sieve improved performance on examples that required regular expressions. As in this scenario, inter-pretability at its best can enable direct debugging through interventions that have an explainable ef-fect on model behavior. 

2.2 Interpretation often can’t fix problems 

In mechanistic interpretability, an interpretability method is seen as faithful if it highlights features 

causally linked to an understood model behavior in output, as verified by interventions on model com-ponents or modifications to input data distributions (Saphra and Wiegreffe, 2024; Mueller et al., 2024). While these methods have shown promise, causal interpretations often fail to be falsifiable. They are underdetermined and inconsistent—often breaking down under distributional shifts, where the as-sumptions underpinning these causal relationships no longer hold. In this section, we examine one widely used mechanistic interpretation: causal interventions using features found with SAEs through steering. We then examine evidence of the brittleness of SAE feature interpretations. Such interventions cannot be reliably used in their current form for debugging. 

Sparse Autoencoders Sparse autoencoders (SAEs) are a popular method used to interpret learned concepts in models. An SAE functions as a regular autoencoder with additional constraints that encourage the intermediate dimension to have sparse activations (Ng, 2011). In practice, an SAE takes in an activation vector from a language model of size N , and sparsely reconstructs the original input activation in the hidden layer of size M > N .Recently, SAEs have been employed to analyze the activations of large language models by treating the hidden layer as a dictionary of concepts after train-ing (Cunningham et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2024). Because SAEs allow us to examine a dictionary of concepts learned by a model, we may potentially use this dictionary to examine how learned con-cepts interact. For example, we could see if the features for gender and profession tend to co-occur in certain ways, when debugging and correcting for gender bias. However, for these associations to be useful in debugging models, they must remain stable across contexts and distributions. 

Limitations of SAEs SAEs can suggest causal interventions through steering, or modifying a model’s behavior by adjusting its activations in directions mapped to particular concepts. In prac-tice, however, the effectiveness of steering can vary widely across different inputs, with the interven-tion failing or causing unintended consequences on specific examples (Tan et al., 2025). It may be possible to improve on naive steering, for instance by trying to minimize the effects on other latent fea-tures when finding a steering vector as in (Chalnev et al., 2024), but this does not fundamentally solve the problem of inconsistent feature interpretations in different contexts. Although there is some evidence that SAEs trained on different models may share some com-mon concepts and patterns of feature organization (Lan et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), at a more granu-lar level the concepts recovered from SAEs depend on what data the SAE was trained on (Paulo and Belrose, 2025). An SAE is trained on activations from a layer of the target model being interpreted. But what inputs is the target model generating its activations from? Model behavior and activations may vary under different data distributions, and therefore SAE concepts found in one domain may 3not apply to others. In one instance (Kissane et al., 2024), when train-ing SAEs on the same model, a guardrail “refusal” feature (Arditi et al., 2024) identified by activations from chat-formatted data failed to generalize when the target model was provided with webtext input instead. For example, suppose we trained an SAE on model activations using input data in which pro-fession and gender were strongly correlated. If our analysis revealed a feature that linked gender and profession, we could apply an intervention to mitigate this bias. However, interventions based on this feature might fail because the same feature might have different functions, and the appropri-ate feature set may even differ, when the model is handling contexts where the presumed correlation between gender and profession no longer holds. 

## 3 Reproducibility ensures detecting of faulty mechanisms 

We have now described how to analyze an output error in evaluation. What about cases where there is no observable error? Sometimes the model gen-erates a seemingly plausible output, but relies on flawed internal mechanisms to produce that result. For example, we might need to address concerns of biased judgments on ambiguous inputs; deter-mine whether a learned algorithm might fail on edge cases; or comply with regulations that ban incorporating protected characteristics for certain decisions. These concerns might not be apparent on individual outputs, prohibiting common metrics like accuracy, but they can affect behavior patterns across a distribution. We argue that reproducible interpretability can aid with this ambiguity in eval-uation, where perhaps the evaluative objective has not been clarified or is ambiguous by nature. 

An example: gender bias in machine translation 

Let’s consider an example where a model which translates Spanish to English: The doctor lost a stethoscope as El doctor perdió un estetoscopio .The English sentence does not provide any hints as to the gender of the doctor, so the model pro-duces a valid translation which assumes the doctor is male. Because gender marking is mandatory in Spanish, the model has to assume some gender on the part of the doctor, and is perhaps relying on the linguistic default of masculine. However, the gender may have been assumed on the basis of the doctor’s profession from the training data distribu-tion, provoking concerns of model bias. Did the model choose el based on the profession of doc-tor ? Perhaps we can answer this question using interpretability tools. We hope to use interpretability to assess the fol-lowing bias claim: “this model chose a masculine token because it referred to a doctor.” We would find that our interpretations are only useful for this claim if they are robust and reliable even when shift-ing away from the training data distribution.For simplicity, let’s assume a toy training data where all male referents are doctors and all doctors are male. Say we base the explanation on a specific neuron causally related to the masculine output token el ; this neuron’s activation determines the output token to be masculine. To define the expla-nation distance , then, a pair of inputs have similar explanations if they feature similar activation for this particular neuron. We seek to explain this neuron through a partic-ular semantic relation between input (profession) and output (gender), such that the explanation dis-tance is proportional to the semantic distance be-tween two input and output pairs. To claim that the output gender depends on the referent being a doctor (and the model is therefore biased), we need this neuron to activate if and only if the referent is a doctor. Suppose that for every example simi-lar to our toy training distribution, this condition holds—the activation is similar when the semantic relation between the profession and the referent is doctor-male. However, we may also find that the neuron also activates when the relation instead simply identifies the referent’s gender as male (i.e. “the doctor is the man. ” translates to “ El doctor es el hombre. ”). As a result, we can interpret the neuron as identifying a doctor referent or a male referent. The neuron’s interpretation is underdeter-mined in the train set because the concepts “doctor” and “male” happen to be equivalent. If we choose the former interpretation, the model appears to be deciding gender based on profession—a potentially undesirable bias. However, if we choose the lat-ter interpretation, the neuron is directly expressing the gender of the referent—so its role in selecting output gender does not imply bias. In choosing a useful interpretation, we must aim for reproducibility: the interpretation should still hold for inputs out-of-distribution as well as for examples similar to the training distribution. If the robust, reliable, and therefore, reproducible inter-pretation defines the relation as referent profession rather than referent gender, we can use this neu-4ron to detect biased behavior on a single example. Without reproducible interpretations, bias can only be measured—if at all—by studying the model’s behavioral patterns across a whole evaluation set. In this situation, as opposed to Section 2, the model can produce plausible outputs using spurious correlations or shortcut learning. These heuristics are often undetectable in current evaluation prac-tices. In §3.1, we will examine the case study of shortcut heuristics in Natural Language Inference (NLI). Then, in §3.2, we explore some counterfac-tual interpretability methods that can identify and validate underlying faulty reasoning patterns. Fi-nally, in §3.3, we argue that reproducible and robust interpretability may ultimately yield faithfulness. 

3.1 Sometimes evaluative objectives are ill-defined 

In addition to invalid reasoning under specific reg-ulatory requirements, some reasoning might be in-valid because it fails to be reproducible under dis-tribution shift. Previously, we discussed how to debug these errors after observation with falsifiable claims. However, these issues can be difficult to identify on in-distribution test sets; they are often discovered manually by chance or intuition. In §2

we discussed how falsifiable interpretability may resolve errors discovered through standard evalua-tion practices. Here, we discuss how reproducible, 

counterfactual interpretation may enable us to dis-cover shortcuts and biases more elegantly, without blind experimentation. One task in NLP where shifting evaluative goals and interpretability needs have intersected is nat-ural language inference (NLI). NLI is the task of predicting if a pair of statements logically entail or contradict each other. For a language model to handle this entailment task, it must learn natu-ral language semantics (Merrill et al.); in fact, the strength of next token predictors depends on their implicitly modeling entailment. Popular datasets for this task permitted models to rely on shortcut heuristics, allowing them to correctly predict the entailment of a sentence pair even when only one sentence was shown (Gururangan et al., 2018; Po-liak et al., 2018). Because the task is defined in terms of both sentences, these heuristics would be brittle under some domain shifts. An array of interventions were proposed to re-move these shortcuts in the models directly and in the datasets themselves. Model-in-the-loop dataset modification processes were used to either select new hard samples (Nie et al., 2020) or filter shortcut-exhibiting samples (Saxon et al., 2023). At train time, residual learning (He et al., 2019), adversarial training (Stacey et al., 2020), and au-tomated counterfactual data augmentation (Wang et al., 2021) all demonstrated that this ability can be unlearned or avoided during training altogether, even for models trained on biased datasets. However, both this problem and its solutions were guided through experimentation and incre-mental changes to the evaluation objective by care-fully selecting input examples. What if we could identify these reasoning flaws without manually creating counterfactual test sets ? If functional interpretability methods for debugging ( §2) and detecting subtle failures ( §3) can be applied to a trained NLI model, they could identify shortcut rea-soning without human discovery, measure its use during inference, and efficiently patch the bias to convert a flawed model into a correct one. The fundamental purpose of evaluation is to an-swer questions about what a model can do. Test sets are a necessary step along a claim-supporting chain of evidence for this purpose. Poor within-task, cross-benchmark generalization is so well known that robustness to it is a means to bench-mark base models (Yang et al., 2023). Models learning shortcuts and heuristics rather than gener-alizable mechanisms are an example of internal validity dangers —benchmark-internal breaks in the chain of evidence (Liao et al., 2021). These internal validity issues are often symptomatic of a problematic gap between the perception and truth of what an evaluation measures, or its construct validity (O’Leary-Kelly and Vokurka, 1998). In the era of benchmarks attempting to measure abstract, generalized capabilities this problem has been exac-erbated (Raji et al., 2021). A desire to measure gen-eralized, abstract human-like cognition in models is natural in a field which aims to replicate human-like intelligence, although this goal is flawed in many ways (Saxon et al., 2024). An evaluation’s inability to map to a real-world task is a textbook 

external validity danger (Liao et al., 2021). 

3.2 But counterfactual interpretation could help frame evaluative objectives 

Proactively identifying model internal vs. strictly externally diagnosable issues in evaluation would be a valuable goal for interpretability research. In-stead of relying on manual efforts to mitigate prob-lematic test set issues in §3.1, the most promising 5path forward lies in identifying shared mechanisms that, across tasks, degrade performance in complex ways that are understandable to humans. Inter-pretability work in the NLI bias explored which shortcut biases models learned during training and whether mitigation was necessary.While NLI mod-els are brittle under tests requiring non-heuristic syntactic (McCoy et al., 2019) or lexical (Glockner et al., 2018) generalization, Srikanth and Rudinger (2022) showed that models trained on the stan-dard two-sentence task—even when exposed to shortcut features—do not necessarily rely on the single-sentence heuristics identified by Poliak et al. (2018) at test time. This illustrates a broader point: evaluation alone often cannot settle debates about what models understand. Here, counterfactual in-terpretations that generalize across test distribu-tions can step in where evaluations leave ambigu-ity. When evaluative objectives are underdefined, interpretability provides a way to probe whether a shared underlying mechanism governs perfor-mance across tasks. When robust and trustworthy, counterfactual in-terpretability can help clarify whether performance across tasks reflects general capabilities or merely task-specific heuristics, especially when evaluation metrics alone are insufficiently precise. In this way, interpretability complements evaluation: evalua-tions elicit behaviors, and interpretability probes the causal mechanisms behind them. Thus, inter-pretability and evaluation are not separate tracks but complementary tools: evaluations act as diverse elicitation settings, while interpretability methods interrogate what is actually driving success. 

3.3 Robust and reproducible explanations yield faithfulness in evaluation 

Without robustness, multiple such counterfactual interpretations can exist for a particular evaluation of behavior, each potentially revealing different re-sults. Here, we argue an interpretation that satisfies robustness should help uncover causally faithful explanations–—interpretations that accurately re-flect the model’s reasoning process (Wiegreffe and Pinter, 2019; Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020; Lyu et al., 2022)—–even when the evaluative objective un-derlying observed behaviors is ill-defined. While the stability of interpretations could significantly vary depending on what criterion we use to mea-sure faithfulness, robustness has shown to be quite effective (Yin et al., 2021). Although different inter-pretability methods serve distinct purposes and may highlight different aspects of the model, we should be able to trust their explanations if they are faithful under some robustness guarantee. From these faith-ful, robust explanations, we should then be able to establish insights that are commonly agreed upon– —some aspects of explanations should hold across different interpretations. If robust interpretations are generally faithful, their insights should reveal common themes in the behavior being measured, even when evaluative objectives are ill-defined. This, in turn, can help refine under-specified eval-uative objective through robust explanations. 

3.4 From identification to intervention 

Falsifiability (§2) and reproducibility (§3) are min-imal criteria for action, necessary but not sufficient. Our gender-MT example makes this concrete: both the profession-proxy and direct-gender readings satisfy reproducibility, yet only their differing OOD predictions can adjudicate which licenses an inter-vention. Predictivity (§4) is what closes this gap: a predictive interpretation specifies what should hap-pen under counterfactual conditions, transforming a diagnosed mechanism into one we can act on. 

## 4 Predicting future failures 

Beyond the two previously discussed scenarios— debugging failures on known evaluative objectives (§2) and detecting subtle failures under ill-defined evaluative objectives (§3)—there are cases in which the evaluation objectives themselves are unknown. In §4, we explore a third scenario: potential model errors that go unnoticed because existing evalua-tions fail to capture the full range of data conditions and failure modes. We argue that if interpretability can produce predictive claims, we may use them to anticipate model failures from internal signals. Specifically, we may generate evaluations that are sufficiently challenging, tailored to the model. By systematically exploring and formalizing criteria for problematic behaviors or challenging inputs, interpretability facilitates a proactive strategy for uncovering model limitations. A clarification is necessary about what we mean by “prediction." In machine learning, “prediction" refers to a model’s output: given an input, the sys-tem produces a label, token, or score. This notion of prediction is in some sense purely behavioral and operational. By contrast, in the scientific sense, pre-diction plays a fundamentally different role. A sci-entific theory and hypothesis demonstrates its depth 6by its testable expectations about what should occur under sufficiently specified assumptions and condi-tions. The success or failure of these predictions be-comes evidence for—or against—the adequacy of our understanding. Under this framing, prediction becomes the strongest form of evaluation: rather than retrospectively summarizing performance, we generate mechanism-grounded hypotheses and de-sign evaluations to validate our understanding. 

Extending the gender-translation example 

Consider a hypothetical scenario in which no re-searcher has yet discovered gender bias in machine translation; for example, the possibility of conflat-ing profession and gender has never been consid-ered. Without exhaustively enumerating evalua-tion scenarios, we could instead examine model internal responses to the training data to anticipate likely failure cases. We may leverage interpretabil-ity to discover geometric entanglements between profession- and gender-related features, with which we generate evaluation sets that the models may struggle to generalize when associations from the training data no longer hold. Under sufficient ro-bustness assumptions and conditions, we could leverage that very geometric properties of these relations to propose this form of bias as an evalua-tive objective even if we never encounter a female doctor in the existing data. We propose that, if we framed interpretability claims in terms of scientific hypotheses to generate predictions about model behaviors, predictive in-terpretability can be leveraged to design evaluative objectives that specifically target areas where the model is likely to underperform. We begin by ex-amining how geometric properties identifiable by interpretability can support predictive evaluation (§4.1). This motivates the need for a precise under-standing of spurious correlations and their relation-ship to model internals (§4.2). Finally, we explore how to construct such evaluation sets by employ-ing mechanisms for predicting out-of-distribution (OOD) behavior (§4.3). 

4.1 We can use geometric properties of representations for prediction 

Models learn geometric representations that reflect patterns in the training data, often aligning with how humans intuitively relate certain concepts. The classic example is the embedding vector relation “man + woman = king + queen,” which captures gendered relationships in a way that mirrors human intuition (Vylomova et al., 2015; Liu and Neubig, 2022). Earlier work demonstrated that word embeddings can encode female and male gender stereotypes along a specific direction in the embedding space (Bolukbasi et al., 2016). This insight has already been used to address issues in model behavior: understanding the geometry of bias enables targeted interventions in embedding spaces for debiasing (Kaneko and Bollegala, 2021; Gonen and Goldberg, 2019). Recently, the geometry of learned representa-tions has been further elucidated, characterized in terms of the intrinsic dimensionality of multi-head attention embeddings and identified per-layer affine mappings of feedforward networks, facilitating a deeper understanding of model behavior in tasks like toxicity detection (Balestriero et al., 2023). These examples illustrate how uncovering the ge-ometric structure of representations can not only reveal problematic model behaviors but also sug-gest it provides avenues for proactively defining and predicting them. These geometric properties are not only observ-able but also mathematically definable and struc-turally persistent (Gardinazzi et al., 2024; Park et al., 2023). Another significant recent develop-ment is the linear representation hypothesis (Elhage et al., 2022; Park et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022), which posits that high-level concepts are encoded as linear directions in representation space. However, this hypothesis may break down for significantly out-of-domain data (lewis smith, 2024), where robustness failures undermine linear representation. Consider the most extreme scenario, in which we identify a feature that appears to represent gender, but in fact no longer corresponds to gender at all when the context relates to individual profession. In such a situation, even if we have interpreted features rep-resenting gender and profession, we cannot predict model behavior from their interaction because their interpretations do not hold in combination. If we aim to use these mathematical definitions of repre-sentations to define evaluative objectives and guide generations of challenge sets, we therefore want robustness guarantees. Operationalizing this claim requires committing to a specific geometric quantity. Candidates in-clude subspace alignment angles, intrinsic dimen-sionality, or distributional distances between con-cept subspaces; each making a different falsifiable prediction about OOD failure. We do not advo-cate a single choice, but observe that the geometric 7argument is only as predictive as the quantity it commits to. Geometric analysis also inherits the underdetermination we diagnosed for SAEs in §2.2: rank collapse and manifold shift are consistent with the same failure pattern, so predictivity requires not just a geometric quantity but a discriminating one. 

4.2 To use interpretation for prediction, we should understand spurious correlations 

In embedding space, concepts exhibit geometric properties that allow certain representations to be combined or separated to form other intuitive con-cepts (Lappin and Bernardy, 2022; Wattenberg and Vi’egas, 2024; Lepori et al., 2023). This struc-ture not only enables interpretability but also helps predict and mitigate biases or other problematic be-haviors. However, even if geometric interpretations are stable, a key challenge remains: models often learn spurious correlations that may not be evident through geometric analysis alone. Detecting these spurious correlations remains a significant challenge for current interpretability methods. SAEs have shown promise in low-data or corrupted-data settings—particularly when spu-rious features are simple—but often fail on OOD data, frequently returning null results (Kantamneni et al., 2024; Karvonen et al., 2024b). When effec-tive, SAEs may still help uncover dataset defects or mislabeled examples (Kantamneni et al., 2024). Moreover, spurious correlations might pose a more fundamental challenge. Prior work suggests that spurious correlations may reflect deeper limitations of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM), which can lead to “causally confused” models that over-fit to patterns that generalize poorly—particularly on OOD inputs (Kirk and Krueger, 2023; Krueger et al., 2020). Since ERM minimizes average risk, models may exploit spurious features to reduce training loss—an issue not easily resolved through scaling or naive fine-tuning. Even increasing data diversity may be insufficient, as concept shifts driven by unobserved causal factors can persist in large datasets (Krueger et al., 2020). 

4.3 Predicting out-of-domain behavior with in-domain interpretability 

Full understanding of a model through interpretabil-ity may enable us predict how it behaves with OOD data (Juneja et al., 2022). Estimating performance in OOD scenarios, especially where labeled data is scarce, is critical for safe deployment. A deeper understanding of how models generalize across distributions allows us to anticipate their behavior on unfamiliar inputs. In this section, we explore analyses that can be extended to predict evaluative criteria and generate targeted OOD test cases. Detecting generalization failures remains asignificant challenge for current interpretability methods. At model internal level, predicting OOD behavior may be possible by leveraging various forms of model invariance. Prior work has shown that such invariances can improve generalization under distribution shifts, including domain changes (Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz, 2020), causal interventions (Arjovsky et al., 2019), data augmentation (Cubuk et al., 2019), and local interpolations (Luo et al., 2017). Models invariant to local transformations tend to factorize input space into a base space and a transformation set, effectively reducing input dimensionality and model complexity—thereby enhancing generaliza-tion. One example is neighborhood invariance, a complexity measure for learned representations. Ng et al. showed that neighborhood invariance remains robust even in OOD settings where other methods fail. Because it only requires selecting appropriate data transformations, this approach presents a promising direction for extending model performance beyond the training distribution. 

## 5 Conclusion               

> Falsifiability Reproducibility Predictability
> SAEs Maybe ✗Maybe CBMs ✔Maybe ✗
> Attention ✗✗✗
> Probing Maybe ✔Maybe
> Table 1: Interpretability against scientific standards.

In sum, behavioral benchmarks tell us what mod-els do, but not how or why. Interpretability, when held to scientific standards of falsifiability, repro-ducibility, and predictability, offers a path toward mechanism-level evaluation that extends beyond traditional metrics. Table 1 makes the gap concrete: across four common method families, none cur-rently meets all three criteria. By enabling causal debugging, reliable detection of faulty reasoning, and anticipation of future failures, interpretability can transform evaluation from a surface-level score-keeping into a scientifically grounded explanation of internal process. If developed rigorously, inter-pretability can become evaluation in its own right. 8Acknowledgements 

IL is supported by Coefficient Giving’s Techni-cal AI Safety Research Grant. We are grateful to Naomi Saphra for insightful discussions and de-tailed comments. 

## References 

Andy Arditi, Oscar Obeso, Aaquib Syed, Daniel Paleka, Nina Panickssery, Wes Gurnee, and Neel Nanda. 2024. Refusal in language models is mediated by a single direction. Preprint , arXiv:2406.11717. Martín Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. 2019. Invariant risk minimization. 

ArXiv , abs/1907.02893. Randall Balestriero, Romain Cosentino, and Sarath Shekkizhar. 2023. Characterizing large language model geometry solves toxicity detection and genera-tion. ArXiv , abs/2312.01648. Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y. Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam Tauman Kalai. 2016. Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Neural Information Processing Systems .Sviatoslav Chalnev, Matthew Siu, and Arthur Conmy. 2024. Improving steering vectors by targeting sparse autoencoder features. Preprint , arXiv:2411.02193. Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V. Le. 2019. Randaugment: Practical auto-mated data augmentation with a reduced search space. 

2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) , pages 3008–3017. Hoagy Cunningham, Aidan Ewart, Logan Riggs, Robert Huben, and Lee Sharkey. 2023. Sparse autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2309.08600. Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Baker Grosse, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. 2022. Toy models of superposi-tion. ArXiv , abs/2209.10652. Leo Gao, Tom Dupré la Tour, Henk Tillman, Gabriel Goh, Rajan Troll, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, Jan Leike, and Jeffrey Wu. 2024. Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders. Preprint , arXiv:2406.04093. Yuri Gardinazzi, Giada Panerai, Karthik Viswanathan, Alessio Ansuini, Alberto Cazzaniga, and Matteo Bi-agetti. 2024. Persistent topological features in large language models. ArXiv , abs/2410.11042. Max Glockner, Vered Shwartz, and Yoav Goldberg. 2018. Breaking NLI systems with sentences that require simple lexical inferences. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,pages 650–655, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hila Gonen and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Lipstick on a pig: Debiasing methods cover up systematic gender biases in word embeddings but do not remove them. 

ArXiv , abs/1903.03862. Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. 2020. In search of lost domain generalization. ArXiv ,abs/2007.01434. Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel R Bowman, and Noah A Smith. 2018. Annotation artifacts in natural language inference data. In 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL HLT 2018 , pages 107–112. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). Naoki Hayashi and Yoshihide Sawada. 2023. Bayesian generalization error in linear neural networks with concept bottleneck structure and multitask formula-tion. ArXiv , abs/2303.09154. He He, Sheng Zha, and Haohan Wang. 2019. Unlearn dataset bias in natural language inference by fitting the residual. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Deep Learning Approaches for Low-Resource NLP (DeepLo 2019) , pages 132–142, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Towards faith-fully interpretable nlp systems: How should we de-fine and evaluate faithfulness? In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Jeevesh Juneja, Rachit Bansal, Kyunghyun Cho, João Sedoc, and Naomi Saphra. 2022. Linear con-nectivity reveals generalization strategies. ArXiv ,abs/2205.12411. Masahiro Kaneko and Danushka Bollegala. 2021. Debi-asing pre-trained contextualised embeddings. ArXiv ,abs/2101.09523. Subhash Kantamneni, Josh Engels, Senthooran Raja-manoharan, and Neel Nanda. 2024. Sae probing: What is it good for? absolutely something! Adam Karvonen, Dhruv Pai, Mason Wang, and Ben Keigwin. 2024a. Sieve: Saes beat baselines on a real-world task (a code generation case study). Tilde Research Blog . Blog post. Adam Karvonen, Can Rager, Samuel Marks, and Neel Nanda. 2024b. Evaluating sparse autoen-coders on targeted concept erasure tasks. ArXiv ,abs/2411.18895. 

9Robert Kirk and David Krueger. 2023. Causal confusion as an argument against the scaling hypothesis. Connor Kissane, Robert Krzyzanowski, Neel Nanda, and Arthur Conmy. 2024. Saes are highly dataset dependent: A case study on the refusal direction. Alignment Forum. Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and Percy Liang. 2020. Concept bottleneck models. In Pro-ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , volume 119 of Proceedings of Ma-chine Learning Research , pages 5338–5348. PMLR. David Krueger, Ethan Caballero, Jörn-Henrik Jacob-sen, Amy Zhang, Jonathan Binas, Rémi Le Priol, and Aaron C. Courville. 2020. Out-of-distribution generalization via risk extrapolation (rex). ArXiv ,abs/2003.00688. Michael Lan, Philip Torr, Austin Meek, Ashkan Khakzar, David Krueger, and Fazl Barez. 2024. Sparse Autoencoders Reveal Universal Feature Spaces Across Large Language Models. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2410.06981 [cs]. Shalom Lappin and Jean-Philippe Bernardy. 2022. A neural model for compositional word embeddings and sentence processing. Proceedings of the Work-shop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Lin-guistics .Matthew L. Leavitt and Ari Morcos. 2020. To-wards falsifiable interpretability research. Preprint ,arXiv:2010.12016. Michael A. Lepori, Thomas Serre, and Ellie Pavlick. 2023. Break it down: Evidence for struc-tural compositionality in neural networks. ArXiv ,abs/2301.10884. lewis smith. 2024. The ‘strong’ feature hypothesis could be wrong. Kenneth Li, Aspen K. Hopkins, David Bau, Fernanda Vi’egas, Hanspeter Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. 2022. Emergent world representations: Exploring a sequence model trained on a synthetic task. ArXiv ,abs/2210.13382. Yuxiao Li, Eric J. Michaud, David D. Baek, Joshua Engels, Xiaoqing Sun, and Max Tegmark. 2024. The geometry of concepts: Sparse autoencoder feature structure. Thomas Liao, Rohan Taori, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Ludwig Schmidt. 2021. Are we learning yet? a meta review of evaluation failures across machine learn-ing. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2) .Emmy Liu and Graham Neubig. 2022. Are represen-tations built from the ground up? an empirical ex-amination of local composition in language models. 

ArXiv , abs/2210.03575. Max Maria Losch, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele. 2019. Interpretability beyond classification output: Seman-tic bottleneck networks. ArXiv , abs/1907.10882. Yucen Luo, Jun Zhu, Mengxi Li, Yong Ren, and Bo Zhang. 2017. Smooth neighbors on teacher graphs for semi-supervised learning. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , pages 8896–8905. Qing Lyu, Marianna Apidianaki, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2022. Towards faithful model explanation in nlp: A survey. Computational Linguistics , 50:657– 723. Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019. Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic heuris-tics in natural language inference. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , pages 3428–3448, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. William Merrill, Zhaofeng Wu, Norihito Naka, Yoon Kim, and Tal Linzen. Can you learn semantics through next-word prediction? the case of entailment. 

Preprint , arxiv:2402.13956 [cs]. Aaron Mueller, Jannik Brinkmann, Millicent Li, Samuel Marks, Koyena Pal, Nikhil Prakash, Can Rager, Aruna Sankaranarayanan, Arnab Sen Sharma, Jiud-ing Sun, Eric Todd, David Bau, and Yonatan Be-linkov. 2024. The quest for the right mediator: A history, survey, and theoretical grounding of causal interpretability. ArXiv , abs/2408.01416. Andrew Ng. 2011. Sparse autoencoder. 

https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs294a/ sparseAutoencoder_2011new.pdf . CS294A Lecture Notes, Stanford University. Nathan Ng, Neha Hulkund, Kyunghyun Cho, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. 2022. Predicting out-of-domain generalization with neighborhood invariance. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , 2023. Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Adversarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 4885–4901, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Scott W O’Leary-Kelly and Robert J Vokurka. 1998. The empirical assessment of construct validity. Jour-nal of operations management , 16(4):387–405. Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. 2023. The linear representation hypothesis and the geome-try of large language models. ArXiv , abs/2311.03658. Gonccalo Paulo and Nora Belrose. 2025. Sparse au-toencoders trained on the same data learn different features. ArXiv , abs/2501.16615. 

10 Adam Poliak, Jason Naradowsky, Aparajita Haldar, Rachel Rudinger, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018. Hypothesis only baselines in natural language infer-ence. NAACL HLT 2018 , page 180. Karl Popper. 2005. The Logic of Scientific Discovery .Routledge, London. Deborah Raji, Emily Denton, Emily M. Bender, Alex Hanna, and Amandalynne Paullada. 2021. Ai and the everything in the whole wide world benchmark. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Process-ing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , vol-ume 1. Naomi Saphra and Sarah Wiegreffe. 2024. Mechanistic? In The 7th BlackboxNLP Workshop .Michael Saxon, Xinyi Wang, Wenda Xu, and William Yang Wang. 2023. PECO: Examining single sentence label leakage in natural language inference datasets through progressive evaluation of cluster outliers. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 3061–3074, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael Stephen Saxon, Ari Holtzman, Peter West, William Yang Wang, and Naomi Saphra. 2024. Benchmarks as microscopes: A call for model metrol-ogy. ArXiv , abs/2407.16711. Sungbin Shin, Yohan Jo, Sungsoo Ahn, and Namhoon Lee. 2023. A closer look at the intervention procedure of concept bottleneck models. ArXiv ,abs/2302.14260. Neha Srikanth and Rachel Rudinger. 2022. Partial-input baselines show that NLI models can ignore context, but they don‘t. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 4753–4763, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Joe Stacey, Pasquale Minervini, Haim Dubossarsky, Se-bastian Riedel, and Tim Rocktäschel. 2020. Avoiding the Hypothesis-Only Bias in Natural Language Infer-ence via Ensemble Adversarial Training. In Proceed-ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8281–8291, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Daniel Tan, David Chanin, Aengus Lynch, Dimitrios Kanoulas, Brooks Paige, Adria Garriga-Alonso, and Robert Kirk. 2025. Analyzing the generaliza-tion and reliability of steering vectors. Preprint ,arXiv:2407.12404. Ekaterina Vylomova, Laura Rimell, Trevor Cohn, and Timothy Baldwin. 2015. Take and took, gaggle and goose, book and read: Evaluating the utility of vec-tor differences for lexical relation learning. ArXiv ,abs/1509.01692. Xinyi Wang, Wenhu Chen, Michael Saxon, and William Yang Wang. 2021. Counterfactual maximum likelihood estimation for training deep networks. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 34, pages 25072–25085. Curran Associates, Inc. Martin Wattenberg and Fernanda Vi’egas. 2024. Rela-tional composition in neural networks: A survey and call to action. ArXiv , abs/2407.14662. Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. 2019. Attention is not not explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) ,pages 11–20, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Linyi Yang, Shuibai Zhang, Libo Qin, Yafu Li, Yi-dong Wang, Hanmeng Liu, Jindong Wang, Xing Xie, and Yue Zhang. 2023. GLUE-X: Evaluating natu-ral language understanding models from an out-of-distribution generalization perspective. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 12731–12750, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Fan Yin, Zhouxing Shi, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2021. On the faithfulness measurements for model interpretations. ArXiv , abs/2104.08782. 

11