Title: 2603.07724v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.07724v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 01:24:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
ISSN: 2756 -2638     

> Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences ;Vol. 1 4No. 01 (2026) (152 -175)
> https://doi.org/10.14738/tmlai.1 401.20018
> Page | 152

# Evaluating Granularity in Markov Chain -Based Trust Models 

# for Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) 

## Rezvi Shahariar  

> 1. Institute of Information Technology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh

Abstract : Trust management is a critical research pillar in Vehicu lar Ad Hoc Networks 

(VANETs), where the reliability of shared data depends entirely on driver integrity. In 

these networks, a driver's reputation is dynamically constructed based on the veracity of 

their recent message history: consistent reliability build s trust, while frequent 

misinformation leads to exclusion. This study analyses driver announcement 

characteristics by modelling behavioural transitions —specifically the frequency and 

nature of shifts between "good" and "bad" states. To facilitate this anal ysis, three distinct 

Markov chain -based behavioural models are evaluated with varying degrees of granularity: 

a 4 -state model, a 7 -state model, and a high -resolution 11 -state model. By simulating 

announcement and reporting patterns, each model's ability to reflect nuanced behavioural 

shifts is assessed. Our results confirm that increasing the number of trust states 

significantly enhances the system's ability to capture complex, dynamic driver behaviours, 

providing a more robust framework for security in VAN ETs. 

Keywords: Driver Announcement and Reporting Behaviour Analysis, Trust Model, VANET, 

Markov Chain Process, and Traffic Announcement 

## INTRODUCTION 

Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) help drivers and other road users obtain real -time 

traffic information . Drivers may plan their journeys by considering several factors, for 

example, distance, road smoothness, and low traffic. These considerations help drivers 

reach their destinations with comfort. However, while driving, incidents may happen and 

cause troub le for others. If an event is not announced promptly , it causes more traffic chaos. 

In VANETs, Roadside Units (RSUs) and the Trust Authority (TA) are the two authoritative 

units, while private and public vehicles are the users of VANET. Figure 1 demonstrat es the 

components of a VANET. In a VANET, one vehicle announces a message (traffic event) which 

others relay in their vicinity. Messages are disseminated by the participating vehicles in the 

VANET. Most of the time, RSUs announce information about the curr ent traffic situation of 

a particular road. So, when a user vehicle gets a message from other vehicles or RSUs, it 

decides whether to use a particular part of a road. To make this decision, the vehicle 

evaluates the trust of the received message. In [1], t he authors perform a comparative 

analysis of using both false and true message announcements in two alternate route 

scenarios. They measure the average travel time of all vehicles from one point to another 

during the simulation. Their results suggest that both false messages and unannounced true 

messages impact a driver’s journey time. From these results, trustworthy announcements 

are always needed in VANETs. Otherwise, vehicles form queues around an incident on a 

road. Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 153

Figure 1 : A usual VANET scenario 

The trust of a message depends on several factors, such as message freshness, 

temporal proximity, role, experience, honesty, forwarding capability, the driver's previous 

history of message announcements, and the driver’s current trust. There are three kinds of 

trust evaluation procedures: data -oriented, entity -oriented, and hybrid. Data -oriented trust 

evaluation mainly considers several metrics related to the incident, for example, message 

freshness, time closeness, and distance. Entity -oriented trust evalua tion evaluates the trust 

of the entity, for example, a driver or a vehicle. This kind of evaluation considers the 

driver’s trust, role, experience and so on. Finally, the hybrid approach evaluates both data 

and entity trust. For example, this evaluation ma y consider message freshness and driver 

current trust to find the trustworthiness of an incident. 

In VANETs, many types of traffic events are so common, for example, accidents ,

traffic jams, stranded vehicles, diversions , road closures and so on. [2] prese nts a traffic 

event management framework considering some traffic events , i.e., accidents , traffic jams, 

diversion. This framework illustrates the whole sequence of operations to sort out some 

events from the road. Usually, t raffic patterns change when an event happens in an area .

Chaos is also seen when drivers announce false messages , and other drivers believe the 

offender’s message to meet his/her goal. When many drivers believe the wrongdoer mal -

intent message , then traffic congestion may happen due to the diverted traffic on a specific 

route. 

The driver’s message announcement behaviour needs to be examined so that I can 

identify when a driver announces a trustworthy or untrustworthy message. To investigate 

this problem, I have developed three distinct Markov chain process -based driver -behaviour 

models. This model is used to capture the interactions between different drivers in terms 

of the likelihood of trustworthy announcements from different trust states. Each model has 

different trust states , and dri vers switch trust states based on their announcements. If the 

vehicle announces trustworthy messages repeatedly , then it moves to higher trust states ,

from where the probability of getting trustworthy messages is increased . Alternatively, 

vehicles , when an nouncing more untrustworthy messages, move into untrusted states from 

where they tend to send more untrustworthy messages . Consequently, they move to lower 

trust states. From a lower trust state, they announce more untrustworthy messages unless Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 154

they try to be honest . If they remain untrusted, they may be blacklisted as soon as their 

trust reaches an unacceptable trust level set by the trust model . Nonetheless , some vehicles 

which may improve their trust score even from lower trust states by announcing only 

trustworthy messages . To simulate this behaviour, the drivers from lower -trust states can 

announce true events with lower probability. An opposite characteristic may be noticed in 

some drivers when they belong to higher trust states. Some drivers may lose trust by 

announcing untrue messages several times from higher trust states. For each state, different 

probabilities for both trustworthy and untrue message announcements are set . Three 

different types of activities for simulating these behaviours are consi dered, which are 

announcements, reporting an announcement , and clarifying an event to RSU queries. Though 

the trust model considered does not add a reward for the clarifier vehicle, which sends a 

response when an RSU collects data from the neighbourhood. U sing these driver behaviour 

models, one can simulate different behaviour from drivers by setting different probabilities .

Section II reviews recent work on behaviour analysis based on different parameters. 

In Section III, two new driver behaviour models a re presented. After that, Section IV depicts 

the driver behaviour analysis of drivers using three different Markov chain -based driver 

behaviour models. Finally, in Section V, this work is concluded by highlighting the 

contributions of this work. 

## RELATED WO RK 

Many trust models have been proposed in the literature , and they used many different kinds 

of algorithms , for example, blockchain, machine learning, fuzzy, and so on , for evaluating 

the trust of drivers. Additionally , many used a Markov chain or Hidden Markov model to 

analyse driver behaviour using steering and brake data. However, only a few in the literature 

perform Markov chain -based driver behaviour analysis based on trustworthy announcements .

Additionally, many surveys are conducted to present the c urrent achievements, identifying 

future research directions for trust management in VANETs. [3] presents a survey which 

classifies trust model follow either the sender side or the receiver side evaluation. This also 

suggests that the trust model must follo w sender -side evaluation to achieve fast decision 

capability to avoid a probable traffic jam. 

In [4], the authors propose a trust model which verifies trust at the sending side 

using a Tamper Proof Device to secure trust. This model uses response time a nd distance as 

the key metrics to assign reward or punishment by the trust manager of drivers. However, 

when a dispute happens, only feedback is collected to verify the event by the RSU. 

Additionally, a fuzzy reward or punishment evaluation technique is al so proposed in [5]. 

This evaluation considers the driver's history, the severity of the event, and the RSU 

confidence and appropriately assigns a reward or punishment to the driver .

[6] proposes a Hidden Markov Model -based driver behaviour recognition mec hanism 

using braking and steering data. This avoids collision on the road using a Hidden Markov 

Model -based actuation behaviour model. Additionally, this employs Dempster Shafer 

Theorem to address the uncertainty issue in VANETs. In [7], researchers consid er 

smartphones as a data collection method from drivers to observe driver action, distraction, 

and response time. The Multiple Markov Switching Variable Auto -Regression (MSVAR) model 

is used to fit the gathered behavioural data. This model can be used in s afety applications. Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 155

[8] collects driver behaviour data using the smartphones of the driver and the client. This 

analyses this data using Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM), Convolutional LSTM, and 

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN -LSTM ). This model considers slow, normal, and 

aggressive behaviour of the driver. This system is implemented in a ride -sharing application 

to inform customers about driver behaviour in advance. In [9], a behavioural analysis is 

conducted to show whether a driver is aggressive or not u sing supervised machine learning 

algorithms ( Support Vector Machine, Logistic Regression, and Random Forest) and deep 

learning algorithms (Multiple Layer Perceptron and Recurrent Neural Network). This 

research collects speed, acceleration, fuel consumption , and direction data from the built -

in sensors of vehicles. 

In [10], a survey on different driver behaviour models is presented. Since VANET is a

heterogeneous environment, this considers both human driven vehicle and autonomous 

vehicles as elements of VA NET. This shows the importance of capturing human driver 

behaviour in different contexts. Thus, an autonomous vehicle should predict the actions of 

a human driver in VANETs. This survey gives importance on car following model and the lane 

changing characte ristic. [11] presents a sequential deep neural network to estimate reward 

based on the communication of a driver. A similar model is used to classify drivers as 

fraudulent v ersus non -fraudulent. This model computes trust from the earned reward of 

drivers. In [12], researchers investigate the trust and experienced driver behaviour. This 

also isolates the trusted driver using six different driving scenarios. The scenarios include 

cruising, curve, intersection, lane -switch, cut -in, and lane addition/reduction. This research 

suggests that trust should account for the functionality of autonomous vehicle driving, 

driving experiences, and driving contexts. In [13], driver behaviour analysis is performed 

using neural networks. This model identifies different driving styles using multiple factors ,

for example, ecological traits, road and vehicle situations, event class and recognition, as 

well as natural and running conditions. 

In the literature, the behavioural analysis of trustworthy announcements based on a

Markov chain model is not used widely. In my previously published work in [5], I consider 

only one Markov state transition diagram for announcement behavioural analysis of drivers. 

Then I think I should consider multiple driver behaviour model s having varying tr ust states. 

I would like to record the impact of varying trust states on the announcement characteristics 

using different Markovian state transition diagrams . From this analysis, I would like to find 

out the advantages of additional trust states in the dri ver behaviour model. In the next 

section, two new driver behaviour models and one existing driver behaviour model from [ 5]

are discussed .

## MARKOV STATE TRANSITION -BASED DRIVER BEHAVIOUR MODEL 

In a vehicular environment, vehicles announce a traffic inciden t when they encounter one 

on the road . There are many different types of traffic incidents. Some of them occur 

frequently , while others occur occasionally. Vehic ular announcement helping others to 

detour to a specific road to avoid the road containing a tr affic incident . When a driver 

announces a true event, he/she builds up trust from it . As other drivers find this is a helpful 

activity, they treat the event announcement positively. So, they consider the sender more 

trustworthy. Alternatively, when the sam e driver announces a false event, drivers get 

annoyed if they detour and later find the event was fraudulent. In some situations, a driver Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 156

may become trustworthy for a while , and at other times he/she may turn into 

untrustworthy. Thus, this type of behavio ur needs to be examined to see when a driver 

sends more untrustworthy messages. If this can be modelled in a Markov chain -based driver 

behaviour model, having different trust states with a defined probability of sending 

trustworthy and untrusted announceme nts from all trust states. It is necessary to consider 

many different driver behaviour models having a varying number of trust states. Hence, 

three different types of Markov chain -based driver behaviour models are considered .

Driver Behaviour Model wit h Four Trust S tates 

Figure 2 shows a Markov chain -based driver behavioural model which consists of four 

different trust states. The trust states are “B lack list ed ”, “B ad ”, “N ormal ” and “G ood ”.

Different probabilities are assigned for both sender and reporte r drivers. Here, sender 

drivers announce an event. Alternatively , reporter drivers report an event from a sender 

driver as they believe the event is false . They can do this both truly and maliciously. T he 

reporting of an untrue attack is the activity of co mplaining to an RSU that the announced 

event is deemed to be false to a reporter driver . Clarifier drivers send feedback about an 

event when an RSU asks for clarification for an event . Their replying pattern can also be set 

using different probabilities. In the real world, they would as they notice on the road. After 

that, RSU determine s the trustworthiness of the event by applying a weighted voting -based 

approach. In this process, RSU collects both feedback and drivers’ trust to find the sum of 

the product of trust and feedback. If this sum is greater than zero , then the RSU detects 

that the originator sends a trustworthy message , and the reporter announces an untrue 

attack. If the sum is less than zero, then reward and punishment are given differently. RSU 

allocates reward and punishment to corresponding drivers based on this decision. It is 

expected that drivers will announce more trustworthy announcements when they announce 

from “G ood ” and higher -trusted states. Hence, in Figure 2, the probability of send ing 

trustworthy messages from S3 is set to higher values than from S2 and S1. Table 1 defines 

the probability of sending trustworthy and untrusted messages from each trust state. 

Figure 2 : Markov chain -based driver behaviour model with only four trust st ates 

Table 1 : Announcement Probabilities                    

> Trust
> State
> Probability of announcing trustworthy
> messages from the sender driver
> Probability of announcing untrue
> messages from the sender driver
> SB 00
> S1 0.40 0.60
> S2 0.50 0.50
> S3 0.80 0.20 Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences
> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 157

Driver Behavi our Model with Six Trust S tates 

Figure 3 shows another driver behaviour model that is used in the driver behaviour analysis 

in [ 5]. This paper also works with the trust model presented in [ 4]. As stated in Figure 3, 

the driver behaviour model consists of s ix different trust states , which are “B lack list ed ”,

“Very Bad ”, “B ad ”, “N ormal ”, “G ood ” and “Very Good ”. Vehicles cannot make any 

announcements from a “B lack list ed ” state as set by the trust framework in [ 4]. Only a few 

types of incidents can be announced from the “Very Bad ” and “Bad ” states. In “N ormal ”

trust state, vehicles can announce most traffic events. From “Good ” and “Very Good ” trust 

state, all traffic events can be announced. At startup, vehicles start their journey from 

“N ormal ” state and based o n their behaviour of announcements and reporting of attacks ,

they either build or lose trust and change trust states accordingly . From the “ Normal ” trust 

state , when trust T is greater than 0.6, drivers enter the “ Good ” state; otherwise, they 

move into the “Bad ” trust state when trust T is less than 0.49. This is how drivers move from 

one trust state into another trust state. The probability distribution of tru e and untrue 

announcements from each state is defined in Table 2 for the sender vehicle. Note that 

different behaviour can be simulated using the different probability distributions for both 

sender and reporter vehicles from each trust state .

Figure 3: Markov chain -based driver behaviour model with six states [ 5]

Table 2 : Probability distribution of true and untrue announcements [5]                   

> Trust States Probability of Announcing a
> Trustworthy Message
> Probability of Announcing aMalicious
> Message
> “Very Good” 0.8 0.2
> “Good” 0.6 0.4
> “Normal” 0.4 0.6
> “Bad” 0.2 0.8
> “Very Bad” 0.1 0.9
> “Blacklisted” 00

Driver Behaviour Model with Eleven Trust States 

In this driver behaviour model, a few additional distinct trust states beyond those specified 

in Figures 2 and 3 are added . The states are “Blacklisted ”, “Very Bad ”, “Bad ”, “Fairly Bad ”,

“Below Normal ”, “Norma l”, “Above Normal ”, “Fairly Good ”, “Good ”, “Very Good ”, and 

“Outstanding ”. In this model, the trust range is divided into many smaller trust ranges , and 

for each range of values, one trust state is added to the model . The trust range defines the 

boundary o f trust values to remain at each state. Many trust states can be used to 

different iate announcements of events based on the ir severity. For example, some events 

like a bush on the road, a narrow road alert , which can be announced by drivers from low -Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 158

trust states. On the other hand, severe kind of events should be announced by highly trusted 

drivers associated with high trust states . The probabilities of trustworthy announcements 

and untrue announcements are set differently for all states , as shown in Table 3. With a

higher trust value, drivers tend to announce or report more accurately , whereas from a

lower trust state , they tend to report more fraudulently. Probability is set for all states 

using this consideration. Different probabilistic distributions for all states can be used when 

different characteristics of drivers need to be tested .

Figure 4: Driver behaviour -based trust model with eleven trust states. 

Table 3 : Probability of true and untrue announcements                             

> Trust states Probability of announcing
> trus tworthy messages
> Probability of Announcing
> Untrue Messages
> “Blacklisted ”00
> “Very Bad ”0.1 0.9
> “Bad ”0.2 0.8
> “Fairly Bad ”0.3 0.7
> “Below Normal ”0.4 0.6
> “Normal ”0.5 0.5
> “Above Normal ”0.6 0.4
> “Fairly Good ”0.7 0.3
> “Good ”0.8 0.2
> “Very Good ”0.85 0.15
> “Outstanding ”0.95 0.05

## PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

Driver behaviour models shown in Figures 2, 3, and 4 are implemented in Veins [14] , which 

consists of OMNe T++ and SUMO. Inside Veins, SUMO is a traffic simulator , and OMNe T++ 

works as a network sim ulator. Both simulators communicate through TRaCI (Traffic Control 

Interface). Veins is used for simulating the aforementioned driver behaviour models , as it is 

freely available. Also, the Erlangen road network scenario from Veins is used . A long circular 

route is created where all vehicles travel until the simulation ends. Vehicles can move on 

roads in both directions using the car following model. Vehicles are kept constant in all 

experiments. A traffic flow containing 100 vehicles is used in all experime nts. In this series 

of experiments, initial trust of vehicles differs widely , which supports the trust framework 

in [ 4]. Vehicle changes trust based on the driver's behaviour , which is decided by the RSU Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 159

whether the driver states truly or falsely. An RSU a llocate reward or punishes drivers based 

on the dispute resolution process illustrated in [ 4]. In this series of experiments, only an 

accident on a road is announced, which carr ies the accident information on a particular road 

section. There is only one ve hicle which announces event periodically . Though in real life, 

any vehicle can face an accident on a road, and then it announce s that to others . The

simulation is conducted this way to track the trust changes for a particular sender and many 

deterministic reporters. The reporters are deterministic in the sense that they would either 

report or not report an event based on their probability distribution of the trust states they 

belong to . A reporter vehicle from lower -trust states would report more announceme nts 

falsely , whereas from higher -trust states , only a few announcements would be reported 

fraudulently . The experiments are carried out in the presence of twelve RSUs and one TA 

(Trust Authority). RSU continually monitors the network based on the traffic i ncidents 

collected from the neighbouring vehicles. It would finish the rebroadcasting only when the 

announced event is sorted. 

This research investigate s whether a trust model with many states is a better model 

than a trust model with fewer states. With driver behaviour models, announcement 

credibility varies based on the probability distribution . Thus, two additional variants of the 

trust -based driver behaviour model with eleven and four trust states are considered . In [5], 

only one driver behaviour model with six trust states is specified, and the analysis is 

performed using only this one . After conducting a series of experiments, results suggest that 

a driver behaviour model with higher trust states can capture more dynamics in driver 

announcement behavi our. Table 4 lists the simulation parameters for experimenting with 

driver announcement behaviour. 

Table 4: Experimental Parameters                    

> Parameters Values
> Trust update RSU reward and punishment
> Simulation period 5000 seconds
> Warm -up period 400 seconds
> Anno uncement intervals 500 seconds
> Initial trust Variable (0.5 to 0.9)
> Vehicle numbers Constant (100)
> Number of RSUs 12
> Transmission range 300 meters
> Presence of a TA Yes
> Attacker model Untrue and Inconsistent attack
> Clarifying reward Fixed (0.08) but n ot added
> Collaboration Timer 120 seconds
> Area Urban
> Number of lanes on the road Two lanes
> Use of Car Following Model Yes Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences
> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 160

Scenario 1: Using the Markov Driver Model with Four States 

In the next few experiments, I have used the following probabilistic d istributions for 

reporter drivers. Table 5 shows that from the S 1 state , a reporter driver truly announces 

60% of the time , whilst falsely announce s 40% of the time. 

Table 5 : Probability distribution for reporter drivers              

> Trust
> state
> Reporter’s Probability of
> Announcing Untrue Messages
> Reporter’s probability of not
> announcing untrue messages
> SB 00
> S1 0.60 0.40
> S2 0.5 0.50
> S3 0.2 0.8

With a 0.7 Trust Score for the Sender Driver and 0.6 for Reporter Drivers 

In this experiment, all vehicles start their journey with a 0.6 trust score except the sender 

vehicle , which start s with a 0.7 trust score. They start their journey from a “Good” trust 

state , from where 80% announcement s should be trustworthy. Here, V1 , V2, V3, V4, and V5 

are reporting the announceme nts from V0 based on their probability . In Figure 5, x -axis 

shows the simulation period, whereas the y -axis shows the trust changes of the driver. 

Figure 5 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

A warmup period (400 seconds ) is noticeable as no event is recorded during this 

period. After elapsing this p eriod, trust scores are recorded during the entire simulation. 

Although V2 reports an incident fraudulently with a trust score of 0.6 and receives RSU 

punishment using an untrue detection procedure , which reduces its trust score. After this ,

V2 enters “Nor mal” trust state. As V0 wins this dispute , it builds more trust from this 

reporting. The event at 1000s is not reported , so no trust increment or decrement happens. 

For the event announcement at 1500s, V3 reports the event from V0 , and V3 builds its trust. 

V0 loses trust at 1700s , but it remains in “Good” trust state. After this event, no other 

events are reported until the 3500s. At this point, V5 announces an untrue report , which 

results in punishment from the RSU , and V0 earns an RSU reward and sets its trust to 0.8 

and finishes with this trust score. V5 receives RSU punishment at the same time and enters 

into “Normal” trust state from “Good” trust state. Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 161

With a 0.6 Trust Score for the Sender Driver and 0.7 for Reporter Drivers 

In this experiment, V0 starts with a 0.6 trust score, and all other vehicles start their journey 

with 0.7. At 500 seconds, V1 reports an announcement from V0 , but later receives the 

punishment from the resolver RSU. In this case, V0 improves trust from this dispute as it 

wins where most clarifiers also believe that V0 announces a true accident event. Then, an 

event at 1000s is also reported by V2 , and hence V0 builds trust at 2100s , and V2 loses trust 

at around 1600s. Th e event at 1500s is also reported by V2 , for which V0 improves trust 

again and reaches the peak and V2’s trust is reduced further. Furthermore, the 

announcements at 2000s and 2500s are reported by V5 and at 3000s are reported by V2. 

These disputes cause tr ust loss for both V2 and V5 , but V0’s trust remains the same , as it 

already hit the peak. In this experiment, all vehicles remain in “Good” trust state except 

the V2 and V5 , which enter “Normal” trust state at 2120s and 3120s respectively. Figure 6 

shows t his scenario, where simulation seconds are shown on the x -axis and trust changes 

are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 6 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a 0.9 Trust Score for the Sender Driver and 0.8 for the Reporter Drivers 

In this e xperiment, I set the initial trust to the highest value for V0, and other vehicles start 

their journey with 0.8. For this experiment, most vehicles are trusted in the network, and 

their trust states are “Good”. 

Figure 7: Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

I did not start from other trust states , as I announced only a severe traffic incident ,

which does not allow for a “Bad” trust state. As V0 is trusted, there are more chances that Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 162

V0 ’s announce ments will be trustworthy , which is also proved when disputes arise. This is 

why V0’s trust remains constant through this experiment. On the other hand, all reporters 

were proven to be mischievous , though they are highly trusted. This simulates the behaviour 

that a highly trusted vehicle can also announce untrue events , as the probability of sending 

untrue repor ting from “Good” trust state is 0.2. Thus, these untrue reports are proved at 

the resolver RSU. Their trust reduces after the dispute resolution process resolves all 

disputes. Figure 7 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are on the x -axis and tru st 

changes are on the y -axis. 

With a 0.8 Trust Score for the Sender Driver and 0.9 for Reporter Drivers 

Figure 8 depicts vehicles starting their journey from a “Good” trust state , but results in a

different characteristic from the above. In this experiment, though a trusted vehicle reports 

at 500s, it is proven untrue at an RSU. Thus, V0 receives a reward , whereas the reporter V1 

receives a punishment. This has also happened on other occasions , for example , 1000s, 

1500s , from V1. V2 and V4 also report trustworthy announcements fraudulently at 2000s and 

2500s, and in the 3500s. This results in their trust reduction . This behaviour proves the fact 

that a trusted driver can report untrue reports or announcements . Similarly, a low -trusted 

driver can build trust by turning its behaviour trustworthy. 

Figure 8 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

## DISCUSSION ON RESULTS 

While these four trust curves provide valuable insights, they fail t o capture a critical nuance: 

significant fluctuations in trustworthiness can occur within a single "Good" trust state. 

Currently, some drivers maintain a "Good" rating despite a drop in trust value, while others 

reach the upper limits of the same category. 

This lack of granularity stems from the overly broad range assigned to this specific 

trust state. To address this and achieve a more precise driver behavior model, a higher 

resolution of trust states is required. Consequently, the following experiments ev aluate the 

model presented in [5] alongside a newly proposed model, illustrated in Figure 4. Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 163

Scenario 2: Using The Markov Driver Model With Six Trust States 

In the next few experiments, I have used the following probabilistic distributions for 

reporter dr ivers. Table 6 says that from the “Very Good” state , a reporter driver truly 

announces 90% of the time , whilst falsely announce s 10% of the time. 

Table 6 : Probability distribution for true and untrue reporting [5]                

> Trust States Probability of Reporting
> Fr audulent
> Probability of trustworthy
> Report ing
> “Very Good” 0.1 0.9
> “Good” 0.3 0.7
> “Normal” 0.5 0.5
> “Bad” 0.7 0.3
> “Very Bad” 0.9 0.1
> “Blacklisted” 00

With a Trust Value of 0.5 for all Drivers 

I have used the same Markov driver behaviour model prese nted in [ 5]. In this experiment, 

all vehicles start their journey with a trust score of 0.5 and from a “Normal” trust state. 

The announcement and reporting probability are also taken from [ 5]. V5 first reports the 

announcement of V0. It is proven false to the resolver RSU, so it assigns punishment to V0 ,

and V5 gets the RSU reward. 

After this, no announcement was possible for V0 as its trust reduces to 0.4 and it 

moves to “Bad” trust state. The trust framework in [4] does not support any kind of 

announceme nt from this state. This happens as I only announce one severe type of incident, 

so the access control mechanism limits the scheduled announcements. As a result, all 

vehicles finish their journey with these trust scores. Figure 9 shows this scenario, where 

simulation seconds are shown on the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 9 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.6 for all Drivers 

In this experiment, all vehicles start with a trust of 0.6 with a “Good” trust state. At 500s, 

a vehicle V5 reports an untrue announcement from V0. V5 wins the dispute , and it builds 

trust . V0 loses trust in this announcement and moves to “Normal” trust state. Vehicle V3 Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 164

also reports an announcement from V0 at 1500s , for which it gets punishment and is moved 

into “Normal” trust state , as it reports an untrue attack falsely. V0 builds trust from this 

dispute at 2100s and again moved back to “Good” trust state. V0 also develops trust at the 

same time for the report genera ted from V2 at 2000s. It is noticed that these two rewards 

are added almost at the same time. Next, an announcement at 3000s is reported by V3 

again , which is false and moved into “Bad” state, so it receives punishment at 3120s , and 

V0 receives RSU reward at the same time and moved to “Very Good” trust state. The next 

announcement at 3500s is reported , which is proven false to an RSU , and it punishes V0. But 

the reporter vehicle does not receive the reward as the environment is wireless , wh ere any 

packet ma y collide with other packets or when the RSU broadcasts the reward message , the 

reporter was not present in the vicinity of the RSU . This is also true for the incident at 

4000s , which causes V1 to receive punishment. But V0 misses the RSU reward due to a s imilar 

reason . However, this can be saved by an RSU when a vehicle enters its zone , which then 

broadcasts the message . Then reward or punishment from RSU will not be lost. Also, I

switched off the beaconing , so the RSU cannot tell when a specific vehicle e nters and leaves 

its region. But in real life, entering an RSU’s area can be detected from the beacon message 

of a vehicle , and then the allocated reward or punishment can be relayed to the vehicle. 

Figure 10 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds a re shown on the x -axis and trust 

changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 10 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.6 for the Sender Driver and 0.5 for all Drivers 

V0 starts from a “Good” trust state with a 0.6 trust s core , and all vehicles start with a 0.5 

trust score from a “Normal” trust state. The announcement at 500s is reported by V5. V5 

receives RSU punishment and moves into “Bad” trust state. 

Figure 11 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 165

On the other hand, V0 receives the RSU reward at 620s. The announcemen t at 1500s 

is reported by V1 , which builds up trust , and V0 receives RSU punishment for announcing an 

untrue event. The event at 2000s is also reported by V3. V3 receives RSU reward at 3100s ,

and V0 receives RSU punishment at 2120s for the untrue event rep orting , and V0 entered 

into “Normal” trust state. V3 again reports an untrue attack for the announcement at 3000s. 

Once again , this proves to be an untrue announcement from V0 for which it receives 

punishment at 3120s. V0 now enters into “Bad” state. V3 re ceives the RSU reward a bit later 

at 3320s. After that, no attack reporting takes place in this experiment as V0 sends nothing 

from the “Bad” trust state. Figure 11 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are 

shown on the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

With a Trust Value of 0.8 for the Sender Driver and 0.7 for all Drivers 

The chart in Figure 12 shows the trust changes among the vehicles , where V0 starts with 0.8 

from “Very Good” trust state , and all other vehicles start with 0.7 trust score from “Good” 

trust state. V0’s first announcement is reported by V5 falsely, and its trust declines . Then, 

the announcement of 1000s is reported by V2 , for which it receives a reward , which is added 

at 2100s and entered into “Very Good” state. This untrue reporting by V2 causes V0 to 

receive punishment at 1620s. The announcement of V0 at 1500s is reported by V4 , for which 

it receives the RSU reward at 2120s. V4 receives punishment at the same time and enters 

into “Good” trust state. The announcements reported at 2000s and 2500s are fraudulent ,

and V3 received RSU punishment and moved into “Normal” trust state. As V0 reaches the 

peak trust, its trust is not improved. V0’s announcement o f the 3000s is also reported by 

V4 , for which it obtains a reward from RSU. The punishment for V0 is not received at the V0 

due to a collision , or when the RSU was broadcasting, and V0 was far from the broadcasting 

location. I also limit the relaying to 3 hops. The latter announcements of V0 at 3500s and 

4000s are also reported by V4 and V5 in turn , and their reporting was proved false to an RSU 

for which they received RSU punishments at 3620s and 4120s. As a result, V5 moved into 

“Normal” trust state. Figu re 12 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are shown on 

the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 12 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.85 for the Sender Driver and 0.8 for all Drivers 

This experiment shows a trust increment or decrement when V0 starts with 0.85 , and all 

other vehicles start with 0.8. Here, all vehicles start from a “very Good” trust state. As V0 

is highly trusted, it broadcasts trust worthy messages only. When any vehicl e reports an Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 166

untrue attack fraudulently, these are disproved at the respective RSUs , and hence their 

trust curves show a small decline by the amount of RSU punishments. This curve in Figure 

13 also shows another pattern that trusted vehicles can also annou nce or report 

fraudulently. Because of this, their trust decreases , and they move into lower trust states. 

For example, V3 enter s into “Bad” trust state and reaches 0.4 trust score from where it 

cannot send untrue reports or severe traffic incidents , thoug h it starts from “Very Good” 

trust state with 0.8 trust score. Figure 13 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are 

shown on the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 13 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.9 for the Sender Driver and 0.85 for all Drivers 

Vehicle V0 starts with a 0.9 trust score from a “Very Good” trust state , and other vehicles 

start with a 0.85 trust score from the same trust state. 0.9 is the highest trust score 

permitte d by the trust framework presented in [ 4]. Vehicles V4, V5, and V3 reports few 

announcements , and these are disproved at RSUs. Reporter vehicles announce fraudulently 

with a probability of 0.1 from this trust state . These vehicles receive RSU punishments ,

which reduce their trust score. As V0 only announce trustworthy messages, it only receives 

RSU rewards , which are received by V0 , but it is not added by V0’s trust manager. As the 

framework supports a maximum trust score of 0.9, V0’s trust is not changed t hroughout its 

journey. Figure 14 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are shown on the x -axis 

and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 14 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 167

With a Trust Value of 0.9 for all Drivers 

This experiment also shows the trust characteristics of sender and reporter vehicles when 

all vehicles start their journey with 0.9. Two vehicles , V3 and V5 reports announcements of 

V0 , which clarifiers clarify as tru e to RSUs. Hence, they receive RSU punishme nts , which 

reduce their trust value and change their trust states to lower trust states. From a low trust 

state like “Normal or Bad”, I set a higher lying probability to tell a lie or to report a 

trustworthy announcement fraudulently. Hence, these two , esp ecially V5 reduces trust in 

the reporting of trustworthy announcements of V0. Figure 15 shows this scenario, where 

simulation seconds are shown on the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 1 5: Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

## DISCUSSION ON RESULTS 

In this set of experiments, driver behaviour is tested when their trust lies between 0.5 and 

0.9. For the analysis, only three states are used, which are “Normal”, “Good”, and “Very 

Good”. During the simulation, it is found that some drivers in the 1st and 3 rd experiments 

announce untrue events more , and they receive RSU punishments. On the other hand, in 

experiments 4, 5, 6, and 7, sender drivers build trust throughout the simulation period. In 

experiments 5 and 7 , some repo rter drivers show very poor behaviour , whereas in all 

experiments , both good and bad reporters are present. Consequently, reporters exhibit 

varying trajectories, either gaining or losing trust throughout the simulation. The behaviour 

analysis performed usi ng the state transition -based model in Figure 3 is good , but it is better 

to explore a bit more by introducing additional trust states in the next scenario .

Scenario 3: Experimenting with Driver Behaviour with Eleven States Markov -Chain Based 

Driver Behav iour Model 

In the next few experiments, I have used the following probabilistic distributions for 

reporter drivers. I have used the Markov chain -based driver behaviour model in Figure 4. It 

has eleven trust states which are “Blacklisted ”, “Very Bad ”, “Bad ”, “Fairly Bad ”, “Below 

Normal ”, “Normal ”, “Above Normal ”, “Fairly Good ”, “Good ”, “Very Good ”, and 

“Outstanding ”.

Table 7 says that from “ Normal ” state , a reporter driver truly announces 45 % of the 

time whilst falsely announce 55 % of the time. Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 168

Table 7: Pro bability of true and untrue announcements from all states                             

> Trust states Probability of false reporting Probability of trustworthy reporting
> “Blacklisted ”00
> “Very Bad ”0.9 0.1
> “Bad ”0.8 0.2
> “Fairly Bad ”0.7 0.3
> “Below Normal ”0.6 0.4
> “Normal ”0.55 0.45
> “Above Normal ”0.5 0.5
> “Fairly Good ”0.4 0.6
> “Good ”0.3 0.7
> “Very Good ”0.2 0.8
> “Outstanding ”0.1 0.9

With a Trust Value of 0.9 for all Drivers 

In this experiment, the trust score of all vehicles is set to 0.9 , which belongs to the 

“Outstanding” trust state. V4 reports the event at 2000s , which is proved later as true 

reporting. So, V4 receives a reward , and V0 gets a punishment at 2120s and enters into 

“Very Good” trust state. As V4 has a peak trust value, its trust state is not changed. The 

ann ouncement at 3000s is reported by V5 , but the respective RSU disproves it . V5 gets RSU 

punishment , which takes it into “Very Good” state , and V0 again reaches peak trust , then 

enters “Outstanding” state. The announcement at 3500s is reported again by V4 , and it gets 

RSU punishment , which reduces its trust by 0.1 , and it enters the “Very Good” state. V4 

reports another transmission from V0 at 4000s , which was a false transmission from V0. After 

that, V4 enters into “Outstanding” trust state from “Very Good” state. However, the curve 

does not show any trust change due to collision , or V0 was distant from the location wh ere 

the punishment was broadcasted . This is common in the wireless environment. Figure 16 

shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are sho wn on the x -axis and trust changes 

are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 1 6: Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 169

With a Trust Value of 0.8 for all Drivers 

In this experiment , all vehicles start their journey with a 0.8 trust score from a “Good” trust 

state. V1 reports an announcement of V0 at 1500s , which disproves at the RSU. Then, V4 

loses trust, and it enters into “Fairly Good” state. V0 builds trust from this dispute and 

enters into the “Outstanding” state. Later, the announcement at 2000s i s also reported by 

vehicle V2 , which gets RSU punishment and enters into “Fairly Good” state. V0’s trust does 

not change as its trust touches its peak. Then, V0’s next announcement at 2500s is reported 

by V1. Like before, V1 face the same result as it repo rts V0’s announcement fraudulently. 

Then V1 enters the “Above Normal” state. V2 reports the announcement at 3000s 

fraudulently, for which it receives the same punishment from the RSU at 3120s and enters 

into “Above Normal” state. There are no further repor ting activities noticed after the 

announcement at 3000s. Figure 17 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are shown 

on the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 1 7: Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.8 for the Sender Driver and 0.9 for all Drivers 

The announcements from V0 are reported at 1500s, 2000s, 4000s, and at 4500s. As most 

vehicles start with a higher trust state , “Outstanding” , so very few reports are generated 

fraudulently compare d to the previous experiments. V0 is seen as trustworthy and enters 

into an “Outstanding” from “Very Good” state. 

Figure 1 8: Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 170

Reporter drivers are untrustworthy throughout the experiment. This is happening as 

it is demonstrating a fact that trustworthy vehicles from higher -trust states can report 

fraudulently. As V0’s announcement was always true , all clarifiers support this fact to the 

resolver RSU. Figure 18 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are shown on the x -

axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axi s. 

With a Trust Value of 0.7 for all Drivers 

In this experiment, all vehicles start their journey with 0.7 from a “Fairly Good” trust state. 

The first announcement is reported by V2 , and V2 re ceives RSU punishment at 620s and then 

enters into “Above Normal” state. V0 receives the RSU reward at 1100s and enters into 

“Good” trust state. Later, at 2000s the announcement is reported by V5 for which V0 

receives the RSU reward and enters into the “Ve ry Good” state at 2120s. V5 receives RSU 

punishment at 3100s and enters into “Above Normal” state. V 0 enters into “Outstanding” 

trust state. Then the announcement at 3500s is reported by V4 dishonestly and receives RSU 

punishment at 3620s enters into “Very Good” state. V0’s trust is not changed as it reaches 

the maximum trust of the framework. V0’s next announcement is reported by V5 at 4500s ,

and the reporting from V5 is proven false to an RSU. Hence, it receives RSU punishment at 

4600s and enters into “No rmal” trust state. V0’s trust is not updated with this reward , as 

V0 already hits the peak trust. Figure 19 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are 

shown on the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 1 9: Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.7 for the Sender Driver and 0.8 for all Drivers 

Figure 20 shows similar characteristics to Figure 19. V0 shows trustworthy behaviour always. 

V0 starts from “Fairly Good” , and reporters start from “Good” trust state. The 

announcements of V0 are reported at 1000s, 1500s, 2500s, 3000s, and at 4000s. In all cases, 

V0 win the dispute s, but all reporters lose trust. Thus, V0 moves from “Fairly Good” to 

“Good” and then to “Outstanding”. This chart shows that whe n V0 reaches peak trust , its 

curve becomes stable, but some reporters show trust decline in their curves as they generate 

false reports . For instance, V3 moves from “Good” to “Fairly Good” and then to “Above 

Normal”. After that , V3 enters the “Normal” stat e. In this experiment , many trust state 

changes were seen in the sender and reporter drivers. Figure 20 shows this scenario, where 

simulation seconds are shown on the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 171

Figure 20 : Trust score changes of sen der and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.6 for the Sender Driver and 0.7 for all Drivers 

Figure 21 show s the trust characteristics curve for the sender and reporter vehicles when 

the sender vehicle starts with 0.6 (“Above Normal” state) and all rep orter vehicles start 

with 0.7 (“Good”) trust scores. The first announcement is trustworthy , but the 2nd 

announcement from V0 is reported by V1 at 1000s , which is not a true report , so V1 receives 

RSU punishment. V1 moves from “Good” to “Above Normal”. V0 e nters into “Good” trust 

state. V3 receives punishment for the announcement at 1500s. V0 receives RSU reward at 

2200s and 3300s for these two announcements from the resolver RSU . Thus, V0 enters into 

“Very Good” and then to the “Outstanding” state. Then the announcement s at 2500s and 

3000s are reported by V3 , for which it receives RSU punishment , but V0 receives RSU reward 

for the first reporting by V3 at 3240s. V0’s trust is not changed after it touches the peak 

trust, and it wins against the reporter vehic les later in all disputes. In this case, V3 enters 

the “Normal” state and then switches into the “Bad” state , from where it cannot report any 

announcement as the trust framework does not support the announcement of an accident 

message from this state . Figu re 21 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are shown 

on the x -axis and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 21 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.6 for all Drivers 

This experiment illustrates tha t vehicles start their journey with a 0.6 trust score from 

“Above Normal” trust state. The first announcement from V0 is reported falsely by V1. V1 

receives punishment at 620s , and V0 receives a reward from this reporting at 1100s. Thus, Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 172

V0 enters “Good” t rust state , and V1 enters “Normal” trust state. V3 consecutively reports 

announcements from V0 at 1500s and 2500s , which are proven to be false to an RSU, so it 

receives RSU punishment at 1620s and 2620s. Thus , V3 moves into “Bad” trust state from 

“Above N ormal” trust state. Alternatively, V0 improves trust from these reports and reaches 

“Outstanding” trust state by traversing “Very Good” trust state. The announcement s of V0 

at 3000s and 3500s are reported by V2 and V1 consecutively , and they are proven fal se to 

an RSU. So, their trust is reduced , but V0’s trust remains the same , as it has already hit the 

peak. In this way, both driver s enter into lower trust states by issuing false reports to an 

RSU. Figure 22 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds a re shown on the x -axis and 

trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 22 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

With a Trust Value of 0.5 for the Sender Driver and 0.6 for all Drivers 

Th is experiment shows the trust changes of sender and reporter drivers, where the sender 

driver starts with a 0.5 trust score from “Normal” trust state, and the reporter drivers start 

with 0.6 trust scores from “Above Normal” trust state. These drivers start with the same 

trust scores, but they finish with di fferent trust scores , which depend on their 

trustworthiness throughout their journey. V1 reports an announcement of V0 at 500s for 

which it receives punishment and moves into “Normal” trust state from “Above Normal” 

trust state. V0 receives the RSU reward later at 1235s and enters into “Above Normal” state. 

Another announcement from the sender is reported by V2 , which receives RSU punishment 

at 1120s , and it also moves into “Normal” state , but V0 receives RSU reward at 2230s . In 

the simulation, reward and p unishment messages are issued at different times to avoid the 

collision of reward and punishment messages . V0 now enters into “Good” trust state. V1 

again reports V0’s announcement , which is also false , and receives RSU punishment at 1620s 

and enters into “Bad” trust state. V0 receives the RSU reward later at 3100s and moves to 

“Very Good” trust state. The announcement of V0 is reported by V3 at 2500s , receives RSU 

punishment at 2620s , and moves into “Normal” state. V0 receives the RSU reward at 3250s 

and e nters into the “Outstanding” state. At this point, V0 reaches the peak trust , so most 

of its announcements are accurate. Later, the reporters V2 and V5 become fraudulent , and 

they receive RSU punishments. V0 receives RSU rewards from these disputes , and th ese are 

not added to V0’s trust , as it already reaches the highest trust. V2 enters into “Below 

Normal” and then “Fairly Bad”. This simulation shows both trust building and trust loss. It 

shows the transition of trust states from “Normal” to “Outstanding” and also the negative 

attitude of V2 , which finishes with a “Fairly Bad” trust state , though it starts with a Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 173

“Normal” trust state . This experiment catches the advantages of using additional trust 

states in the driver behaviour model and shows both positiv e and negative attitudes of 

drivers. Figure 23 shows this scenario, where simulation seconds are shown on the x -axis 

and trust changes are shown on the y -axis. 

Figure 23 : Trust score changes of sender and reporter drivers 

## DISCUSSION ON RESULTS 

In this se t of experiments, a refined driver behaviour model incorporating eleven distinct 

trust states is implemented. Analysis of the experimental data reveals that this higher -

resolution model allows for a more dynamic representation of trust, with drivers switch ing 

between states more frequently than in previous experiments using seven -state models. The 

utilization of eleven trust states provides significant advantages in terms of granularity, 

allowing for a precise, nuanced differentiation of driver trustworthin ess. Specifically, within 

the higher range of trust scores, where a seven -state model might aggregate behaviours into 

broad categories (e.g., " Good," " Very Good," " Outstanding"), the eleven -state model enables 

a more detailed classification —such as disting uishing between “Above Normal”, “Fairly 

Good”, “Good”, “Very Good”, and “Outstanding”. This increased granularity ensures that 

the model can capture subtle transitions in driver behaviour that would otherwise be lost. 

By providing this higher level of deta il, I can classify, analyse, and predict driver trust with 

greater accuracy than previous models, enabling better calibration of automation to prevent 

over -trust or distrust. 

## CONCLUSION 

In this paper, driver announcement and reporting trustworthiness beha vio ur is analyse d

using three different Markov chain -based state transition diagrams. These three models have 

a different number of states: four, seven, and eleven. After examining these three models 

regarding driver announcement behaviour, the results sug gest that the model with eleven 

states captures more dynamic behaviour for both announcement and reporting activities. 

Drivers switch more frequently among different trust states, both back and forth, according 

to the probability distribution. Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences 

Scholar Publishing 

Page | 174 

## REFERENCES 

1. Shahariar, R. and Phillips, C., 2024. The need for trustworthy announcements to achieve driving 

comfort, International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.16, No.1/2, pp. 13 -

25 

2. Shahariar, R. and Phillips, C., A Traffic INCIDENT MANAGEMENT FRA MEWORK FOR VEHICULAR AD 

HOC NETWORKS, International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Vol.17, No. 2, 

pp. 19 -41 

3. Shahariar, R. and Phillips, C. (2025) ‘A Survey of Security Threats and Trust Management in 

Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks’, TECS , 13, pp . 127 -172. 

4. Shahariar, R. and Phillips, C., 2024. A trust management framework for vehicular ad hoc 

networks, International Journal of Security, Privacy and Trust Management (IJSPTM) Vol 12, No 

1, pp. 15 -36 

5. Shahariar, R. and Phillips, C., 2024. A fuzzy rewa rd and punishment scheme for vehicular ad 

hoc networks, International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications (IJACSA), 

Vol. 14, No. 6, pp. 1 -17 

6. Bhatt, D. and Gite, S., 2016, March. Novel driver behaviour model analysis using hidden Markov 

mo del to increase road safety in smart cities. In Proceedings of the Second International 

Conference on Information and Communication Technology for Competitive Strategies (pp. 1 -

6). 

7. Zaky, A.B., Khamis, M.A. and Gomaa, W., 2022. Markov Switching Model for Dr iver Behavior 

Prediction: Use Cases on Smartphones. In Recent Innovations in Artificial Intelligence and 

Smart Applications (pp. 255 -275). Cham: Springer International Publishing. 

8. Cojocaru, I., Popescu, P.S. and Mihaescu, M.C., 2022, October. Driver Behavi our Analysis based 

on Deep Learning Algorithms. In RoCHI (pp. 108 -114). 

9. Peppes, N., Alexakis, T., Adamopoulou, E. and Demestichas, K., 2021. Driving behaviour 

analysis using machine and deep learning methods for continuous streams of vehicular 

data. Sensor s, 21 (14), p.4704. 

10. Negash, N.M. and Yang, J., 2023. Driver behavior modeling toward autonomous vehicles: 

Comprehensive review. IEEE Access , 11 , pp.22788 -22821. 

11. Tangade, S., Manvi, S.S. and Hassan, S., 2019, September. A deep learning based driver 

classific ation and trust computation in VANETs. In 2019 IEEE 90th Vehicular Technology 

Conference (VTC2019 -Fall) (pp. 1 -6). IEEE. 

12. Zhang, R., Tan, Z., Lin, Z., Zhang, R. and Liu, C., 2025. Exploring the trust and behavior of 

experienced advanced driver assistance sy stem drivers: An on -road study. Accident Analysis & 

Prevention , 217 , p.108071. 

13. Malik, M., Nandal, R., Dalal, S. and Jalglan, V., 2022. Deriving Driver Behavioral Pattern 

Analysis and Performance Using Neural Network Approaches. Intelligent Automation & Sof t

Computing , 32 (1). 

14. Sommer, C., German, R. and Dressler, F., 2010. Bidirectionally coupled network and road 

traffic simulation for improved IVC analysis. IEEE Transactions on mobile computing , Vol. 10, 

No. 1, pp.3 -15. Vol. 14 No. 01 (2026): Transactions on Engineering and Computing Sciences  

> Scholar Publishing
> Page | 175

Authors’ Profiles 

Rezvi Shahariar obtained his B.Sc. degree and an M.S. degree in Computer 

Science and Engineering from the University of Dhaka, Bangladesh in 

2006. After some time working as a lecturer at the University of Asia 

Pacific, Dhaka, Bangladesh, he is now an Associate Professor at the 

Institute of Information Technology, University of Dhaka. Previously, he 

worked as an Assistant Professor and Lecturer at the same institute. He 

received a PhD on trust management for vehicular ad hoc networks at 

Queen Mary, University of London. Hi s research focuses effective resource management in 

wireless network environments with an emphasis on trust, security in VANETs, fuzzy 

modelling, driver behaviour modelling, and the application of machine learning to security